Clarissa: Or, the history of a young lady: comprehending the most important concerns of private life. ... Published by the editor of Pamela. ... [pt.1]Richardson, Samuel, 1689-1761.325 600dpi bitonal TIFF page images and SGML/XML encoded textUniversity of Michigan LibraryAnn Arbor, Michigan2008 September004835420T58992CW112657733K051638.001CW3312657733ECLL0447200101This keyboarded and encoded edition of the work described above is co-owned by the institutions providing financial support to the Early English Books Online Text Creation Partnership. This Phase I text is available for reuse, according to the terms ofCreative Commons 0 1.0 Universal. The text can be copied, modified, distributed and performed, even for commercial purposes, all without asking permission. 

Clarissa: Or, the history of a young lady: comprehending the most important concerns of private life. ... Published by the editor of Pamela. ...Richardson, Samuel, 1689-1761.7v.,plate : engr.music ; 12⁰.printed for S. Richardson: and sold by A. Millar: J. and Ja. Rivington: John Osborn; and by J. Leake, at Bath,London :1748.The editor of Pamela = Samuel Richardson.Vols. 3-7 bear the imprint: "London: printed for S. Richardson: and sold by John Osborn; Andrew Millar; J. and J. Rivington; and by J. Leake, at Bath", except vol. 4 has "J. and Ja. Rivington" in place of "J. and J. Rivington".Vols. 3 and 4 are found in two states: in the first state, three leaves of preface intended for vol. 3 are found between the titlepage and text of vol. 4. In the second state, the preface has been removed from vol.4 to be found between titlepage and text of vol. 3 (Sale).Vols. 5-7 were also issued as part of the 2nd. edition, 1749.Augustan Reprint Society: preface (by William Warburton) to vol. III and vol. IV only.Reproduction of original from the British Library.Sale, 32English Short Title Catalog, ESTCT58992.Electronic data. Farmington Hills, Mich. : Thomson Gale, 2003. Page image (PNG). Digitized image of the microfilm version produced in Woodbridge, CT by Research Publications, 1982-2002 (later known as Primary Source Microfilm, an imprint of the Gale Group).Created by converting TCP files to TEI P5 using tcp2tei.xsl, TEI @ Oxford. 

EEBO-TCP is a partnership between the Universities of Michigan and Oxford and the publisher ProQuest to create accurately transcribed and encoded texts based on the image sets published by ProQuest via their Early English Books Online (EEBO) database (http://eebo.chadwyck.com). The general aim of EEBO-TCP is to encode one copy (usually the first edition) of every monographic English-language title published between 1473 and 1700 available in EEBO. 

EEBO-TCP aimed to produce large quantities of textual data within the usual project restraints of time and funding, and therefore chose to create diplomatic transcriptions (as opposed to critical editions) with light-touch, mainly structural encoding based on the Text Encoding Initiative (http://www.tei-c.org). 

The EEBO-TCP project was divided into two phases. The 25,363 texts created during Phase 1 of the project have been released into the public domain as of 1 January 2015. Anyone can now take and use these texts for their own purposes, but we respectfully request that due credit and attribution is given to their original source. 

Users should be aware of the process of creating the TCP texts, and therefore of any assumptions that can be made about the data. 

Text selection was based on the New Cambridge Bibliography of English Literature (NCBEL). If an author (or for an anonymous work, the title) appears in NCBEL, then their works are eligible for inclusion. Selection was intended to range over a wide variety of subject areas, to reflect the true nature of the print record of the period. In general, first editions of a works in English were prioritized, although there are a number of works in other languages, notably Latin and Welsh, included and sometimes a second or later edition of a work was chosen if there was a compelling reason to do so. 

Image sets were sent to external keying companies for transcription and basic encoding. Quality assurance was then carried out by editorial teams in Oxford and Michigan. 5% (or 5 pages, whichever is the greater) of each text was proofread for accuracy and those which did not meet QA standards were returned to the keyers to be redone. After proofreading, the encoding was enhanced and/or corrected and characters marked as illegible were corrected where possible up to a limit of 100 instances per text. Any remaining illegibles were encoded as <gap>s. Understanding these processes should make clear that, while the overall quality of TCP data is very good, some errors will remain and some readable characters will be marked as illegible. Users should bear in mind that in all likelihood such instances will never have been looked at by a TCP editor. 

The texts were encoded and linked to page images in accordance with level 4 of the TEI in Libraries guidelines. 

Copies of the texts have been issued variously as SGML (TCP schema; ASCII text with mnemonic sdata character entities); displayable XML (TCP schema; characters represented either as UTF-8 Unicode or text strings within braces); or lossless XML (TEI P5, characters represented either as UTF-8 Unicode or TEI g elements). 

Keying and markup guidelines are available at theText Creation Partnership web site. 

engTHE HISTORY OF Miſs CLARISSA HARLOWE.
LETTER I. MiſsANNA HOWE,To MiſsCLARISSA HARLOWE.
Jan. 10.IAM extremely concerned, my deareſt friend, for the diſturbances that have happened in your family. I know how it muſt hurt you, to become the ſubject of the public talk: And yet, upon an occaſion ſo generally known, it is impoſſible but that whatever relates to a young lady, whoſe diſtinguiſhed merits have made her the public care, ſhould engage every-body's attention. I long to have the particulars from yourſelf; and of the uſage I am told you receive upon an accident you could not help; and in which, as far as I can learn, the ſufferer was the aggreſſor. 

Mr. DiggsHer brother's ſurgeon., whom I ſent for at the firſt hearing of the rencounter, to inquire, foryourſake, how your brother was, told me, That there was no danger from the wound, if there were none from the fever; which, it ſeems, has been increaſed by the perturbation of his ſpirits. 

Mr. Wyerley drank tea with us yeſterday; and tho' he is far from being partial to Mr. Lovelace, as it may be well ſuppoſed, yet both he and Mr. Symmes blame your family for the treatment they gave him, when he went in perſon to inquire after your brother's health, and to expreſs his concern for what had happened. 

They ſay, That Mr. Lovelace could not avoid drawing his ſword: And that either your brother's unſkilfulneſs or violence left him, from the very firſt paſs, intirely in his power. This, I am told, was what Mr. Lovelace ſaid upon it; retreating as he ſpoke:'Have a care, Mr. Harlowe—Your violence puts you out of your defence. You give me too much advantage! For your ſiſter's ſake, I will paſs by everything;—if—' 

But this the more provoked his raſhneſs, to lay himſelf open to the advantage of his adverſary—Who, after a ſlight wound in the arm, took away his ſword. 

There are people who love not your brother, becauſe of his natural imperiouſneſs, and fierce and uncontroulable temper: Theſe ſay, That the young gentleman's paſſion was abated, on ſeeing his blood guſh plentifully down his arm; and that he received the generous offices of his adverſary, who help'd him off with his coat and waiſtcoat, and bound up his arm, till the ſurgeon could come, with ſuch patience, as was far from making a viſit afterwards from that adverſary to inquire after his health, appear either inſulting, or improper. 

Be this as it may, every-body pities you. So ſteady,ſo uniform in your conduct: So deſirous, as you always ſaid, of ſliding through life to the end of it unnoted; and, as I may add, not wiſhing to be obſerved even for your ſilent benevolence; ſufficiently happy in the noble conſciouſneſs which rewards it:Rather uſeful, than glaring,your deſerved motto; though now puſh'd into blaze, as we ſee, to your regret; and yet blamed at home for the faults of others;—How muſt ſuch a virtue ſuffer on every hand!—Yet it muſt be allowed, that your preſent trial is but proportion'd to your prudence!— 

As all your friends without doors are apprehenſive, that ſome other unhappy event may reſult from ſo violent a contention, in which, it ſeems, the families on both ſides are now engaged, I muſt deſire you to enable me, on the authority of your own information, to do you occaſional juſtice. 

My mamma, and all of us, like the reſt of the world, talk of nobody but you, on this occaſion, and of the conſequences which may follow, from the reſentments of a man of Mr. Lovelace's ſpirit; who, as he gives out, has been treated with high indignity by your uncles. My mamma will have it, that you cannot now, with any decency, either ſee him, or correſpond with him. She is a good deal prepoſſeſſed by your uncle Antony; who occaſionally calls upon us, as you know; and, on this rencounter, has repreſented to her the crime, which it would be in a ſiſter, to encourage a man, who is towadeinto her favour, (this was his expreſſion) thro' the blood of her brother. 

Write to me therefore, my dear, the whole of your ſtory, from the time that Mr. Lovelace was firſt introduce•into your family; and particularly an account of all that paſſed between him and your ſiſter; about which there are different reports; ſome people ſuppoſing that the younger ſiſter (at leaſt by her uncommon merit) has ſtolen a lover from the elder: And pray write in ſo full a manner, as may gratify thoſe,who know not ſo much of your affairs, as I do. If any thing unhappy ſhould fall out from the violence of ſuch ſpirits as you have to deal with, your account of all things previous to it, will be your juſtification. 

You ſee what you draw upon yourſelf, by excelling all your ſex: Every individual of it, who knows you, or has heard of you, ſeems to think you anſwerable toherfor your conduct in points ſo very delicate and concerning. 

Every eye, in ſhort, is upon you, with the expectation of an example. I wiſh to heaven you were at liberty to purſue your own methods: All would then, I dare ſay, be eaſy, and honourably ended. But I dread your directors and directreſſes: for your mamma, admirably well qualified as ſhe is to lead, muſt ſubmit to be led. Your ſiſter and brother will certainly put you out of your courſe. 

But this is a point you will not permit me to expatiate upon: Pardon me therefore, and I have done.—Yet, why ſhould I ſay, Pardon me? When your concerns are my concerns? When your honour is my honour? When I love you, as never woman loved another? And when you have allowed of that concern and of that love; and have for years, which in perſons ſo young, may be called many, ranked in the firſt claſs of your friends, 

Your ever-grateful and affectionate ANNA HOWE?Will you oblige me with a copy of the preamble to the clauſes in your grandfather's will in your favour; and allow me to ſend it to my aunt Harman?—She is very deſirous to ſee it. Yet your character has ſo charm'd her, that, tho' a ſtranger to you perſonally, ſhe aſſents to the preference given you in it, before ſhe knows his reaſons for that preference. 

LETTER II. MiſsCLARISSA HARLOWE,To MiſsHOWE.
Harlowe-Place,Jan. 13.HOW you oppreſs me, my deareſt friend, with your politeneſs! I cannot doubt your ſincerity; but you ſhould take care, that you give me not reaſon, from your kind partiality, to call in queſtion your judgment. You do not diſtinguiſh, that I take many admirable hints from you, and have the art to paſs them upon you for my own: For in all you do, in all you ſay, nay, in your very looks (ſo animated!), you give leſſons, to one who loves you and obſerves you, as I love and obſerve you, without knowing that you do:—So, pray, my dear, be more ſparing of your praiſe for the future, leſt, after this confeſſion, we ſhould ſuſpect, that you ſecretly intend to praiſe yourſelf, while you would be thought only to commend another. 

Our family has indeed been ſtrangely diſcompoſed.—Diſcompoſed!—It has been intumults,ever ſince the unhappy tranſaction; and I have borne all the blame; yet ſhould have had too much concern, from myſelf, had I been more juſtly ſpared by every one elſe. 

For, whether it be owing to a faulty impatience, having been too indulgently treated to beinuredto blame, or to the regret I have to hear thoſe cenſured on my account, whom it is my duty to vindicate; I have ſometimes wiſhed, that it had pleaſed God to have taken me in my laſt fever, when I had everybody's love, and good opinion; but oftener, that I had never been diſtinguiſhed by my grandpapa as I was: Which has eſtranged from me, I doubt, my brother's and ſiſter's affections; at leaſt, has raiſed a jealouſy, with regard to the apprehended favour of my two uncle, that now-and-then overſhadows their love. 

My brother being happily recover'd of his fever, and his wound in a hopeful way, altho' he has not yet ventured abroad, I will be as particular as you deſire in the little hiſtory you demand of me. But heaven forbid, that any thing ſhould ever happen, which may require it to be produced for the purpoſe you ſo kindly mention! 

I will begin, as you command, with Mr. Lovelace's addreſs to my ſiſter; and be as brief as poſſible. I will recite facts only; and leave you to judge of the truth of the report raiſed, that the younger ſiſter has robbed the elder. 

It was in purſuance of a conference between Lord M. and my uncle Antony, that Mr. Lovelace (my papa and mamma not forbidding) paid his reſpects to my ſiſter Arabella. My brother was then in Scotland, buſying himſelf in viewing the condition of the conſiderable eſtate which was left him there by his generous godmother, together with one as conſiderable in Yorkſhire. I was alſo abſent at myDairy-houſe,as it is calledHer grandfather, in order to invite her to him, as often as her other friends would ſpare her, indulged her in erecting and ſitting-up a dairy-houſe in her own taſte. When finiſhed, it was ſo much admired for its elegant ſimplicity and convenience, that the whole ſeat, before, of old time, from its ſituation, calledThe Grove,was generally known by the name ofThe Dairy-houſe;her grandfather, particularly, was fond of having it ſo called., buſied in the accounts relating to the eſtate which my grandfather had the goodneſs to bequeath me; and which once a year are left to my inſpection, altho' I have given the whole into my papa's power. 

My ſiſter made me a viſit there the day after Mr. Lovelace had been introduced; and ſeemed highly pleaſed with the gentleman. His birth, his fortune in poſſeſſion, a clear 2000l. per annum,as Lord M. had aſſured my uncle; preſumptive heir to that nobleman's large eſtate: His great expectations from Lady SarahSadleir, and Lady Betty Lawrance; who, with his uncle, intereſted themſelves very warmly (he being the laſt of his line) to ſee him married. 

'So handſome a man!—O her beloved Clary!'(for then ſhe was ready to love me dearly, from the overflowings of her good humour on his account!)'He was buttoohandſome a man forher!—Were ſhe but as amiable asſomebody,there would be a probability ofholdinghis affections!—For he was wild, ſhe heard;verywild, very gay; loved intrigue—But he was young; a man of ſenſe: Would ſee his error; could ſhe but have patience with his faults, if his faults were not cured by marriage.' 

Thus ſhe ran on; and then wanted me'to ſee the charming man,'as ſhe called him.—Again concerned,'that ſhe was not handſome enough for him:'With,'A ſad thing, that the man ſhould have the advantage of the woman in that particular.'—But then, ſtepping to the glaſs, ſhe complimented herſelf,'That ſhe was verywell:That there were many women deemed paſſable, who were inferior to herſelf: That ſhe was always thought comely; and, let her tell me, that comelineſs having not ſo much to loſe as beauty had, would hold, when that would evaporate and fly off:—Nay, for that matter,'(and again ſhe turn'd to the glaſs),'her features were not irregular; her eyes not at all amiſs.'And I remember they were more than uſually brilliant at that time.—'Nothing, in ſhort, to be ſound fault with, tho' nothing very engaging, ſhe doubted—Was there, Clary?' 

Excuſe me, my dear, I never was thus particular before; no, not to you. Nor would I now have written thus freely of a ſiſter; but that ſhe makes a merit to my brother, of diſowning that ſhe ever liked him; as I ſhall mention hereafter: And then you will always have me give you minute deſcriptions, nor ſuffer me to paſs by the air and manner in which things areſpoken, that are to be taken notice of; rightly obſerveing, that air and manner often expreſs more than the accompanying words. 

I congratulated her upon her proſpects. She received my compliments with a great deal of ſelf-complacency. 

She liked the gentleman ſtill more at his next viſit: And yet he made no particular addreſs to her; altho' an opportunity was given him for it. This was wonder'd at, as my uncle had introduced him into our family, declaredly as a viſitor to my ſiſter. But as we are ever ready to make excuſes, when in good humour with ourſelves, for the ſuppoſed ſlights of thoſe whoſe approbation we wiſh to engage; ſo my ſiſter found out a reaſon, much to Mr. Lovelace's advantage, for his not improving the opportunity that was given him.—It was baſhfulneſs, truly, in him. (Baſhfulneſs in Mr. Lovelace, my dear!)—Indeed, gay and lively as he is, he has not the look of animpudentman. But, I fancy, it is many, many years ago, ſince he was baſhful. 

Thus, however, could my ſiſter make it out—'Upon her word, ſhe believed Mr. Lovelace deſerved not the bad character he had as to women. He was really, toherthinking, amodeſtman. Hewouldhave ſpoken out, ſhe believed: But once or twice, as he ſeemed to intend to do ſo, he was under ſoagree-able a confuſion! Such a profound reſpect he ſeemed to ſhew her: A perfectreverence,ſhe thought: She lov'd dearly, that a gentleman in courtſhip ſhould ſhew a reverence to his miſtreſs.'—So indeed we all do, I believe: And with reaſon; ſince, if I may judge from what I have ſeen in many families, there is little enough of it ſhewn afterwards.—And ſhe told my aunt Hervey, that ſhe would be a little leſs upon the reſerve next time he came:'She was not one of thoſeflirts,not ſhe, who would give pain to a perſon that deſerved to be well-treated; and the more for the greatneſs of his value for her.'—Iwiſh, ſhe had not Somebody whom I love in her eye. Yet is not her cenſure unjuſt, I believe:—Is it, my dear?—Excepting in one undue and harſh word? 

In his third viſit, Bella govern'd herſelf by this kind and conſiderate principle: So that, according to her own account of the matter, the manmighthave ſpoken out.—But he was ſtillbaſhful:He was not able to overcome thisunſeaſonable reverence.So this viſit went off, as the former. 

But now ſhe began to be diſſatisfied with him: She compared his general character, with This his particular behaviour to her; and, having never been courted before, own'd herſelf puzzled, how to deal with ſo odd a lover.'What did the man mean!—Had not her uncle brought himdeclaredlyas a ſuiter to her?—It could not be baſhfulneſs (now ſhe thought of it), ſince he might have open'd his mind to heruncle,if he wanted courage to ſpeak directly toher.—Not that ſhe cared much for the man neither: But it was right, ſurely, that a woman ſhould be put out of doubt, early, as to a man's intentions, in ſuch a caſe as This, from his own mouth.—But, truly, ſhe had begun to think, that he was more ſolicitous to cultivate hermamma's good opinion, thanhers!—Every-body, ſhe own'd, admired her mamma's converſation.—But he was miſtaken, if he thought that would do withher.And then, for his own ſake, ſurely, he ſhould put it into her power to be complaiſant to him, if he gave her cauſe of approbation. This diſtant behaviour, ſhe muſt take upon her to ſay, was the more extraordinary, as he continued his viſits, and declared himſelf extremely deſirous to cultivate a friendſhip with the whole family; and as he could have no doubt about her ſenſe, if ſhe might take upon her to join her own with the general opinion; he having taken great notice of, and admired many of hergood things,as they fell from her lips.—Reſerves were painful, ſhemuſt needs ſay, to open and free ſpirits, like hers: And yet ſhe muſt tell my aunt'(to whom all this was directed)'that ſhe ſhould never forget what ſhe ow'd to her ſex, and to herſelf, were Mr. Lovelace as unexceptionable in his morals, as in his figure, and were he to urge his ſuit ever ſo warmly.' 

I was not of her council. I was ſtill abſent. And it was agreed between my aunt Hervey and her, that ſhe was to be quite ſolemn and ſhy in his next viſit, if there were not a peculiarity in his addreſs to her. 

But my ſiſter, it ſeems, had not conſider'd the matter well. This was not the way, as it proved, to be taken with a man of Mr. Lovelace's penetration, for matters ofmere omiſſion:—Nor withanyman; ſince if love has not taken root deep enough to cauſe it to ſhoot out into declaration, if an opportunity be fairly given for it, there is little room to expect, that the blighting winds of anger or reſentment will bring it forward. Then my poor ſiſter is not naturally goodhumour'd. This is too well known a truth for me to endeavour to conceal it, eſpecially from you. She muſt therefore, I doubt, have appear'd to great diſadvantage, when ſhe aim'd to be worſe-temper'd than ordinary. 

How they managed it in this converſation I know not: One would be tempted to think by the iſſue, that Mr. Lovelace was ungenerous enough to ſeek the occaſion givenSee Mr.Lovelace's Letter,No. xxxi.in which he briefly accounts for his conduct in this affair., and to improve it. Yet he thought fit to put the queſtion too:—But, ſhe ſays, it was not till by ſome means or other (ſhe knew not how) he had wrought her up to ſuch a pitch of diſpleaſure with him, that it was impoſſible for her to recover herſelf, at the inſtant: Nevertheleſs he re-urged his queſtion, as expecting a definitive anſwer, without waiting for the return of her temper, or endeavouring to mollify her: ſo that ſhe was under a neceſſity of perſiſting inher denial: Yet gave him reaſon to think, that ſhe did not diſlike his addreſs, only themannerof it; his court being rather made to her mamma than to herſelf, as if he were ſure ofherconſent at any time. 

A good encouraging denial, I muſt own:—As was the reſt of her plea; to wit,'A diſinclination to change her ſtate.—Exceedingly happy as ſhe was: She never could be happier!'And ſuch-likeconſenting negatives,as I may call them; and yet not intend a reflection upon my ſiſter: For what can any young creature, in the like circumſtances, ſay, when ſhe is not ſure, but a too ready conſent may ſubject her to the ſlights of a ſex, that generally values a bleſſing, either more or leſs, as it is obtained with difficulty or eaſe? Miſs Biddulph's anſwer to a copy of verſes from a gentleman, reproaching our ſex, as acting in diſguiſe, is not a bad one, altho' you perhaps may think it too acknowleging for the female character,Ungen'rous ſex!—To ſcorn us, if we'rekind;And yet upbraid us, if we ſeemſevere!DoYOU,t' encourage us to tell our mind,Yourſelves, put off diſguiſe, and be ſincere.YOUtalk of Coquetry!—Your own falſe heartsCompelour ſex to act diſſembling parts. 

Here I am obliged to lay down my pen. I will ſoon reſume it. 

LETTER III. MiſsCLARISSA HARLOWE,To MiſsHOWE.
Jan. 13, 14.AND thus, as Mr. Lovelace thought fit totake it,had he his anſwer from my ſiſter. It was with very great regret, as he pretended (I doubt the man is an hypocrite, my dear!), that be acquieſced in it.'So much determinedneſs; ſuch a noble firmneſs in my ſiſter; that there was no hope of prevailing upon herto alter ſentiments ſhe had adopted on full conſideration.''He ſigh'd,as Bella told us, when he took his leave of her:'Profoundly ſigh'd: Graſp'd her hand, and kiſſed it withſuchan ardor.—Withdrew withſuchan air of ſolemn reſpect.—She had him then before her.—She could almoſt find in her heart, altho' he had vex'd her, to pity him.'A good intentional preparative, this pity; ſince, at the time, ſhe little thought that he would not renew his offer. 

He waited on my mamma, after he had taken leave of Bella, and reported his ill ſucceſs, in ſo reſpectful a manner, both with regard to my ſiſter, and to the whole family, and with ſo much concern that he was not accepted as a relation to it, that it left upon them all (my brother being then, as I have ſaid, in Scotland) impreſſions in his favour; and a belief, that this matter would certainly be brought on again. But Mr. Lovelace going up directly to town, where he ſtay'd a whole fortnight; and meeting there with my uncle Antony, to whom he regretted his niece's unhappy reſolution not to change her ſtate; it was ſeen that there was a total end put to the affair. 

My ſiſter was not wanting to herſelf on this occaſion; but made a virtue of neceſſity; and the man was quite another man with her.'A vain creature! too well knowing his advantages: Yet thoſe, not what ſhe had conceived them to be!—Cool and warm by fits and ſtarts: An ague-like lover: A ſteady man, a man of virtue, a man of morals, was worth a thouſand of ſuch gay flutterers. Her ſiſter Clary might think it worth her while perhaps, to try to engage ſuch a man: She had patience: She was miſtreſs of perſuaſion; and indeed, to do the girl juſtice, hadſomethingof a perſon: But as forher,ſhe would not have a man, of whoſe heart ſhe could not be ſure for one moment; no, not for the world: And moſt ſincerely glad was ſhe, that ſhe had rejected him.' 

But when Mr. Lovelace return'd into the country, he thought fit to viſit my papa and mamma; hoping, as he told them, that, however unhappy he had been in the rejection of the wiſh'd-for alliance; he might be allowed to keep up an acquaintance and friendſhip with a family which he ſhould always reſpect. And then, unhappily, as I may ſay, was I at home, and preſent. 

It was immediately obſerved, that his attention was fixed on me. My ſiſter, as ſoon as he was gone, in a ſpirit of bravery, ſeem'd deſirous to promote his addreſs, ſhould it be tendered. 

My aunt Hervey was there; and was pleaſed to ſay, We ſhould make the fineſt couple in England; if my ſiſter had no objection.—No, indeed, with a haughty toſs, was my ſiſter's reply!—It would be ſtrange if ſhe had, after the denial ſhe had given him upon full deliberation. 

My mamma declared, That her only diſlike of his alliance with either daughter, was on account of his faulty morals. 

My uncle Harlowe, That hisdaughterClary, as he delighted to call me from childhood, would reform him, if any woman in the world could. 

My uncle Antony gave his approbation in high terms: But referr'd, as my aunt had done, to my ſiſter. 

She repeated her contempt of him; and declar'd, that were there not another man in England, ſhe would not have him. She was ready, on the contrary, ſhe could aſſure them, to reſign her pretenſions under hand and ſeal, if Miſs Clary were taken with his tinſel; and if every one elſe approved of his addreſs to the girl. 

My papa, indeed, after a long ſilence, being urged to ſpeak his mind, by my uncle Antony, ſaid, That he had a letter from his ſon James, on his hearing of Mr. Lovelace's viſits to his daughter Arabella; which he had not ſhewn to any-body but my mamma; thattreaty being at an end when he received it: That in this letter he expreſſed great diſlikes to an alliance with Mr. Lovelace, on the ſcore of his immoralities: That he knew, indeed, there was an old grudge between them: That, being deſirous to prevent all occaſions of diſunion and animoſity in his family, he would ſuſpend the declaration of his own mind, till his ſon arrived, and till he had heard his further objections: That he was the more inclined to make his ſon this compliment, as Mr. Lovelace's general character gave but too much ground for his ſon's diſlike of him; adding, That he had heard, (So, he ſuppoſed, had every-one) that he was a very extravagant man: that he had contracted debts in his travels: And, indeed, he was pleaſed to ſay, he had the air of a ſpendthrift. 

Theſe particulars I had partly from my aunt Hervey, and partly from my ſiſter; for I was called out, as ſoon as the ſubject was entered upon. And, when I returned, my uncle Antony aſked me, HowIſhould like Mr. Lovelace? Every-body ſaw, he was pleaſed to ſay, that I had made a conqueſt. 

I immediately anſwered, Not at all: He ſeemed to have too good an opinion both of his perſon and parts, to have any great regard to his wife, let him marry whom he would. 

My ſiſter, particularly, was pleaſed with this anſwer, and confirmed it to be juſt; with a compliment to my judgment:—For it washers. 

But the very next day Lord M. came to Harlowe-Place: I was then abſent: And, in his nephew's name, made a propoſal in form; declaring, That it was the ambition of all his family to be related to ours: And he hoped his kinſman would not have ſuch an anſwer on the part of the younger ſiſter, as he had had on that of the elder. 

In ſhort, Mr. Lovelace's viſits were admitted, as thoſe of a man who had not deſerved diſreſpect from our family; but, as to his addreſs to me, with areſervation, as above, on my papa's part, that he would determine nothing without his ſon. My diſcretion, as to the reſt, was confided in: For ſtill I had the ſame objections as to the man: Nor would I, when we were better acquainted, hear any-thing but general talk from him; giving him no opportunity of converſing with me in private. 

He bore this with a reſignation little expected from his natural temper, which is generally reported to be quick and haſty; unuſed, it ſeems, from childhood, to check or controul: A caſe too common in conſiderable families, where there is an only ſon: Andhismother never had any other child. But, as I have heretofore told you, I could perceive, notwithſtanding this reſignation, that he had ſo good an opinion of himſelf, as not to doubt, that his perſon and accompliſhments would inſenſibly engage me: And could That be once done, he told my aunt Hervey, he ſhould hope from ſo ſteady a temper, that his hold in my affections would be durable: While my ſiſter accounted for his patience in another manner, which would perhaps have had more force, if it had come from a perſon leſs prejudiced:'That the man was not fond of marrying at all: That he might perhaps have half-a-ſcore miſtreſſes; and that delay might be as convenient for hisroving,as for mywell-actedindifference.'—That was her kind expreſſion. 

Whatever were his motive for a patience ſo generally believed to be out of his uſual character, and where the object of his addreſs was ſuppoſed to be of fortune conſiderable enough to engage his warmeſt attention, he certainly eſcaped many mortifications by it: For while my papa ſuſpended his approbation till my brother's arrival, he received from every-one thoſe civilities which were due to his birth: And altho' we heard, from time to time, reports to his diſadvantage with regard to morals; yet could we not queſtion him upon them, without giving him greater advantages,than the ſituation he was in with us would juſtify to prudence; ſince it was much more likely, that his addreſs wouldnotbe allowed of, than that itwould. 

And thus was he admitted to converſe with our family, almoſt upon his own terms; for while my friends ſaw nothing in his behaviour but what was extremely reſpectful, and obſerved in him no violent importunity, they ſeemed to have taken a great liking to his converſation: While I conſidered him only as a a common gueſt, when he came; and thought myſelf no more concerned in his viſits, nor at his entrance or departure, than any other of the family. 

But this indifference of my ſide was the means of procuring him one very great advantage; for upon it was grounded that correſpondence by letters, which ſucceeded;—and which, had it been to be begun, when the family-animoſity broke out, would never have been entered into on my part. The occaſion was this: 

My uncle Hervey has a young gentleman intruſted to his care, whom he has thoughts of ſending abroad, a year or two hence, to make the Grand Tour, as it is called; and, finding Mr. Lovelace could give a good account of every-thing neceſſary for a young traveller to obſerve upon ſuch an occaſion, he deſired him to write down a deſcription of the courts and countries he had viſited; and what was moſt worthy of curioſity in them. 

He conſented, on condition that I woulddirecthis ſubjects, as he called it: And, as every-one had heard his manner of writing commended; and thought his relations might be agreeable amuſements in winter evenings; and that he could have no opportunity particularly to addreſs me in them, ſince they were to be read in full aſſembly, before they were to be given to the young gentleman; I made the leſs ſcruple to write, and to make obſervations, and put queſtions, for our further information—Still the leſs, perhaps, as I love writing; and thoſe who do, are fond, you know, ofoccaſions to uſe the pen: And then, having every one's conſent, and my uncle Hervey's deſire that I would, I thought, that if I had been the only ſcrupulous perſon, it would have ſhewn a particularity, that a vain man would conſtrue to his advantage; and which my ſiſter would not fail to animadvert upon. 

You have ſeen ſome of theſe letters; and have been pleaſed with his account of perſons, places, and things; and we have both agreed, that he was no common obſerver upon what he had ſeen. 

My ſiſter herſelf allowed, that the man had a tolerable knack of writing and deſcribing: And my papa, who had been abroad in his youth, ſaid, That his remarks were curious, and ſhewed him to be a perſon of reading, judgment, and taſte. 

Thus was a kind of correſpondence begun between him and me, with general approbation; while everyone wonder'd at, and was pleaſed with, his patient veneration of me; for ſo they called it. However, it was not doubted, that he would ſoon be more importunate; ſince his viſits were more frequent, and he acknowleged to my aunt Hervey a paſſion for me, accompany'd with an awe, that he had never known before; to which he attributed what he called his butſeemingacquieſcence with my papa's pleaſure, and the diſtance I kept him at. And yet, my dear, this may be his uſual manner of behaviour to our ſex; for had not my ſiſter, at firſt, all his reverences? 

Mean time, my father, expecting this importunity, kept in readineſs the reports he had heard in his diſfavour, to charge them upon him then, as ſo many objections to his addreſs. And it was highly agreeable to me, that he did ſo: It would have been ſtrange, if it were not; ſince the perſon who could reject Mr. Wyerley's addreſs for the ſake of hisfree opinions,muſt have been inexcuſable, had ſhe not rejected another's for hisfreer practices. 

But I ſhould own, that in the letters he ſent me,upon the general ſubject, he more than once incloſed a particular one, declaring his paſſionate regards for me, and complaining, with fervour enough, of my reſerves: But of theſe I took not the leaſt notice; for as I had not written to him at all, but upon a ſubject ſo general, I thought it was but right, to let what he wrote upon one ſo particular, paſs off as if I never had ſeen it; and the rather, as I was not then at liberty, from the approbation his letters met with, to break off the correſpondence, without aſſigning the true reaſon for doing ſo. Beſides, with all his reſpectful aſſiduities, it was eaſy to obſerve, (if it had not been his general character) that his temper is naturally haughty and violent; and I had ſeen enough of that untractable ſpirit in my brother, to like it in one who hoped to be ſtill nearer related to me. 

I had a little ſpecimen of this temper of his, upon the very occaſion I have mentioned: For, after he had ſent me a third particular letter with the general one, he aſked me, the next time he came to Harlowe-Place, If I had not received ſuch a one from him?—I told him, I ſhould never anſwer one, ſo ſent; and, that I had waited for ſuch an occaſion as he had now given me, to tell him ſo: I deſired him therefore not to write again on the ſubject; aſſuring him, that if he did, I would return both, and never write another line to him. 

You cannot imagine how ſaucily the man looked; as if, in ſhort, he was diſappointed, that he had not made a more ſenſible impreſſion upon me: And when he recollected himſelf (as he did immediately), what a viſible Struggle it coſt him to change his haughty airs for more placid ones. But I took no notice of either; for I thought it beſt to convince him, by the coolneſs and indifference, with which I repulſed his forward hopes (at the ſame time intending to avoid the affectation of pride or vanity), that he was not conſiderable enough in my eyes to make me take over-ready offence at what he ſaid, or how he looked:In other words, that I had not value enough for him, to treat him with peculiarity either by ſmiles or frowns. Indeed, he had cunning enough to give me, undeſignedly, a piece of inſtruction which taught me this caution; for he had ſaid in converſation once,'That if a man could not make a lady in courtſhip own herſelfpleaſedwith him, it was asmuch,and oftentimesmore,to his purpoſe, to make herangrywith him.' 

I muſt break off here. But will continue the ſubject the very firſt opportunity. Mean time, I am, 

Your moſt affectionate friend and ſervant, CL. HARLOWE.LETTER IV. MiſsCLARISSA HARLOWE,To MiſsHOWE.
Jan. 15.THIS, my dear, was the ſituation Mr. Lovelace and I were in, when my brother arrived from Scotland. 

The moment Mr. Lovelace's viſits were mentioned to him, he, without either heſitation or apology, expreſſed his diſapprobation of them. He found great flaws in his character; and took the liberty to ſay, in ſo many words, That he wondered, how it came into the hearts of his uncles to encourage ſuch a man foreitherof his ſiſters: At the ſame time returning his thanks to my father for declining his conſent tillhearrived, in ſuch a manner, I thought, as a ſuperior would do, when he commended an inferior, for haveing well performed his duty in his abſence. 

He juſtified his avowed inveteracy, by common fame, and by what he had known of him at college; declaring, That he had ever hated him; ever ſhould hate him; and would never own him for a brother, or me for a ſiſter; if I married him. 

That college-begun antipathy I have heard accounted for in this manner: 

Mr. Lovelace was always noted for his vivacity and courage; and no leſs, it ſeems, for the ſwift and ſurpriſing progreſs he made in all parts of literature: For diligence in his ſtudies, in the hours of ſtudy, he had hardly his equal. This, it ſeems, was his general character at the univerſity; and it gained him many friends among the more learned youth; while thoſe who did not love him, feared him, by reaſon of the offence his vivacity made him too ready to give, and of the courage he ſhewed in ſupporting the offence when given; which procured him as many followers as he pleaſed among the miſchievous ſort.—No very amiable character, you'll ſay, upon the whole. 

But my brother's temper was not happier. His native haughtineſs could not bear a ſuperiority ſo viſible; and whom we fear more than love, we are not far from hating: And, having leſs command of his paſſions, than the other, was evermore the ſubject of his, perhapsindecent,ridicule: So, that they never me•without quarreling: And every-body, either from love or fear, ſiding with his antagoniſt, he had a moſt uneaſy time of it, while both continued in the ſame college.—It was the leſs wonder, the efore, that a young man, who is not noted for the gentleneſs of his temper, ſhould reſume an antipathy early begun, and ſo deeply-rooted. 

He found my ſiſter, who waited but for the occaſion, ready to join him in his reſentments againſt the man he hated. She utterly diſclaimed all manner of regard for him:'Never liked him at all:—His eſtate was certainly much incumber'd: It was impoſſible it ſhould be otherwiſe; ſo intirely devoted as he was to his pleaſures. He kept no houſe; had no equipage: Nobody pretended that he wanted pride: The reaſon therefore was eaſy to be gueſſed at.'And then did ſhe boaſt of, and my brother praiſe her for, refuſing him: And both joined on all occaſions to depreciate him, and not ſeldommadethe occaſions; their diſpleaſureagainſt him cauſing every ſubject to run into this, if it began not with it. 

I was not ſolicitous to vindicate him, when I was not joined in their reflections. I told them, I did not value him enough to make a difference in the family on his account: And as he was ſuppoſed to have given too much cauſe for their ill opinion of him, I thought he ought to take the conſequence of his own faults. 

Now-and-then, indeed, when I obſerved, that their vehemence carried them beyond all bounds of probability, I thought it but juſtice to put in a word for him. But this only ſubjected me to reproach, as haveing a prepoſſeſſion in his favour that I would not own.—So that when I could not change the ſubject, I uſed to retire either to my muſic, or to my cloſet. 

Their behaviour to him, when they could not help ſeeing him, was very cold and diſobliging; but, as yet, not directly affrontive: For they were in hopes of prevailing upon my papa to forbid his viſits. But, as there was nothing in his behaviour, that might warrant ſuch a treatment of a man of his birth and fortune, they ſucceeded not: And then they were very earneſt withmeto forbid them. I aſk'd, What authority I had to take ſuch a ſtep in my father's houſe; and when my behaviour to him was ſo diſtant, that he ſeemed to be as much the gueſt of any other perſon of the family, themſelves excepted, as mine?—In revenge, they told me, That it was cunning management between us; and that we both underſtood one another better than we pretended to do. And at laſt, they gave ſuch a looſe to their paſſions, all of a ſuddenThe reaſon of this their more-openly ſhewn animoſ•ty is given inletter xiii., as I may ſay, that inſtead of withdrawing, as they uſed to do when he came, they threw themſelves in his way, purpoſely to affront him. 

Mr. Lovelace, you may believe, very ill brookedthis: But, nevertheleſs, contented himſelf to complai•of it to me: In high terms, however; telling me, that but for my ſake, my brother's treatment of him was not to be borne. 

I was ſorry for the merit this gave him, in his own opinion, with me: And the more as ſome of the affronts he received, were too flagrant to be excuſed: But I told him, That I was determin'd not to fall out with my brother, if I could help it, whatever were his faults: And, ſince they could not ſee one another with temper, ſhould be glad, that he would not throw himſelf in my brother's way; and I was ſure my brother would not ſeekhim. 

He was very much nettled at this anſwer: But ſaid, He muſt bear his affronts, if I would have it ſo. He had been accuſed himſelf of violence in his temper: But he hoped to ſhew on this occaſion, that he had a command of his paſſions, which few young men, ſo provoked, would beableto ſhew; and doubted not, but it would be attributed to aproper motiveby a perſon of my generoſity and penetration. 

My brother had juſt before, with the approbation of my uncles, employ'd a perſon related to a diſcharged bailiff or ſteward of Lord M. who had had the management of ſome part of Mr. Lovelace's affairs (from which he was alſo diſmiſſed by him), to inquire into his debts; after his companions; into his amours; and the like. 

My aunt Hervey, in confidence, gave me the following particulars of what the man ſaid of him. 

'That he was a generous landlord: That he ſpared nothing for ſolid and laſting improvements upon his eſtate: And that he looked into his own affairs, and underſtood them: That he had, when abroad, been very expenſive; and contracted a large debt (for he made no ſecret of his affairs); yet choſe to limit himſelf to an annual ſum, and to decline equipage, in order to avoid being obliged to his uncle and aunts; from whom he might have what moneyhe pleaſed; but that he was very jealous of their controul; had often quarrels with them, and treated them ſo freely, that they were all afraid of him. However, that his eſtate was never mortgaged, as my brother had heard it was; his credit was always high; and, he believed, he was by this time, near upon, if not quite, clear of the world. 

'He was a ſad gentleman, he ſaid, as to women:—If his tenants had pretty daughters, they choſe to keep them out of his ſight. He believed, he kept no particular miſtreſs; for he had heardnewelty,that was the man's word, was every-thing with him. But for his uncle's and aunts teazings, fanſy'd he would not think of marriage: Was never known to be diſguiſed with liquor: But was a great plotter, and a great writer: That he lived a wild life in town, by what he had heard: Had ſix or ſeven companions as bad as himſelf; whom now-and-then he brought down with him; and the country was always glad when they went up again. He would have it, that, altho' paſſionate, he was good-humour'd; loved as well to take a jeſt, as to give one, and would railly himſelf, upon occaſion, the freeſt of any man he ever knew.' 

This was his character from an enemy; for, as my aunt obſerved, every thing the man ſaid commendably of him, came grudgingly, with aMuſt needs ſay—To do him juſtice,&c. while the contrary was delivered with a free good-will. And this character, as a worſe was expected, tho' This was bad enough, not anſwering the end of inquiring after it, my brother and ſiſter were more apprehenſive than before, that his addreſs would be encouraged: ſince the worſt part of it was known, or ſuppoſed, when he was firſt introduced to my ſiſter. 

But, with regard to myſelf, I muſt obſerve in his disfavour, that, notwithſtanding the merit he wanted to make with me, for his patience upon my brother'sill-treatment of him, I owed him no compliments for trying to conciliate withhim.Not that I believe it would have ſignified any thing, if he had made ever ſuch court, either to him, or to my ſiſter: Yet one might have expected, from a man of his politeneſs, and from his pretenſions, you know, that he would have been willing totry.Inſtead of which, ſuch a hearty contempt he ſhew'd of them both, of my brother eſpecially, that I ever heard of it with aggravations. And for me to have hinted at an alteration in his behaviour to my brother, was an advantage I knew he would have been proud of; and which therefore I had no mind to give him.—But I doubted not, that having ſo very little encouragement fromany-body, his pride would ſoon take fire, and he would of himſelf diſcontinue his viſits, or go to town; where, till he came acquainted with our family, he uſed chiefly to reſide: And in this latter caſe he had no reaſon to expect, that I wouldreceive,much leſsanſwer,his letters; the occaſion, which had led me to receiveanyof his, being by this time over. 

But my brother's antipathy would not permit him towaitfor ſuch an event; and after ſeveral exceſſes, which Mr. Lovelace ſtill return'd with contempt, and a haughtineſs too much like that of the aggreſſor, my brother took upon himſelf to fill up the door-way, once, when he came, as if to oppoſe his entrance: and, upon his aſking for me, demanded, What his buſineſs were with his ſiſter? 

The other, with a challenging air, as my brother ſays, told him, He would anſwer a gentlemananyqueſtion: But he wiſhed, that Mr. James Harlowe, who had of late given himſelf high airs, would remember, that he was notnowat college. 

Juſt then the good Dr. Lewin, who frequently honours me with aviſit of converſation,as he is pleaſed to call it, and had parted with me in my own parlour, came to the door; and, hearing the words, interpoſed;both having their hands upon their ſwords: And telling Mr. Lovelace where I was, he burſt by my brother, to come to me; leaving him chafing, he ſaid, like a hunted boar at bay. 

This alarm'd us all. My father was pleaſed to hint to Mr. Lovelace; and I, by his command, ſpoke a great deal plainer; that he wiſh'd he would diſcontinue his viſits, for the peace-ſake of the family. 

But Mr. Lovelace is not a man to be eaſily brought to give up his purpoſe, in a point, eſpecially, wherein he pretends his heart is ſo much engag'd: And an abſolute prohibition not having been given, things went on for a little while as before: For I ſaw plainly, that to have deny'd myſelf to his viſits (which, however, I declin'd receiving, as often as I could) was to bring forward ſome deſperate iſſue between the two; ſince the offence ſo readily given on one ſide, was only brooked by the other, out of conſideration to me. And thus did my brother's raſhneſs lay me under an obligation where I would leaſt have ow'd it. 

The intermediate propoſals of Mr. Symmes and Mr. Mullins, both (in turn) encouraged by my brother, were inducements for him to be more patient for a while; he being in hopes, as no-body thought me over-forward in Mr. Lovelace's favour, that he ſhould engage my father and uncles to eſpouſe the one or the other in oppoſition tohim.But when he found, that I had intereſt enough to diſengage myſelf from their addreſſes, as I had (before he went to Scotland, and, before Mr. Lovelace viſited here) of Mr. Wyerley's, he then kept no meaſures: And firſt ſet himſelf to upbraid me for a ſuppoſed prepoſſeſſion; which he treated, as if it were criminal: And then to inſult Mr. Lovelace in perſon. And it being at Mr. Edward Symmes's, the brother of the other Symmes, two miles off, and no good Dr. Lewin again to interpoſe, the unhappy rencounter follow'd. My brother was diſarm'd in it, as you have heard; and on beingbrought home, and giving us ground to ſuppoſe he was much worſe hurt than he really was, and a fever enſuing, every-one flam'd out; and all was laid at my door. 

Mr. Lovelace, for three days together, ſent twice each day to inquire after my brother's health; and, altho' he received rude, and even ſhocking returns, he thought fit, on the fourth day, to make in perſon the fame inquiries; and received ſtill greater incivilities from my two uncles, who happen'd to be both there. My papa alſo was held by force from going to him with his ſword in his hand, altho' he had the gout upon him. 

I fainted away with terror, ſeeing every-one ſo violent; and hearing his voice, ſwearing he would not depart without ſeeing me, or making my uncles aſk his pardon for the indignities he had received at their hands: A door being alſo held faſt lock'd between them; my mamma ſtruggling with my papa; and my ſiſter, after treating him with virulence, inſulting me, as faſt as I recover'd. But, when he was told how ill I was, he departed, vowing revenge. 

He was ever a favourite with our domeſtics. His bounty to them, and having always ſomething facetious to ſay to each, had made them all of his party: And on this occaſion they privately blamed every-body elſe, and reported his patience and gentlemanly behaviour (till the provocations given him ran very high) in ſuch favourable terms, that thoſe reports, and my apprehenſions of the conſequence of this treatment, induced me toread a letterhe ſent me that night; and, it being written in the moſt reſpectful terms, offering to ſubmit the whole to my deciſion, and to govern himſelf intirely by my will,to anſwerit ſome days after. 

To this unhappy neceſſity was owing our renewed correſpondence, as I may call it: Yet I did not write, till I had inform'd myſelf from Mr. Symmes's brother, that he was really inſulted into the act of drawing hisſword, by my brother's repeatedly threatening, upon his excuſing himſelf out of regard to me, to brand him if he did not; and, by all the inquiry I could make, that he was again the ſufferer from my uncles, in a more violent manner than I have related. 

The ſame circumſtances were related to my papa, and other friends, by Mr. Symmes; but they had gone too far, in making themſelves parties to the quarrel, either to retract or forgive; and I was forbid correſponding with him, or to be ſeen a moment in his company. 

But one thing I can ſay, but that in confidence, becauſe my mamma commanded me not to mention it:—That, expreſſing her apprehenſion of the conſequences of the indignities offered to Mr. Lovelace, ſhe told me, She would leave it to my prudence, to prevent, all I could, the impending miſchief ononeſide. 

I am obliged to break off. But, I believe, I have written enough to anſwer very fully all that you have commanded from me. It is not for a child to ſeek to clear her own character, or to juſtify her actions, at the expence of the moſt revered ones: Yet, as I know, that the account of all thoſe further proceedings, by which I may be affected, will be intereſting to ſo dear a friend (who will communicate to others no more than what is fitting), I will continue to write as I have opportunity, as minutely as we are uſed to write to each other. Indeed I have no delight, as I have often told you, equal to that which I take in converſing with you:—Byletter,when I cannot inperſon. 

Mean time, I can't help ſaying, that I am exceedingly concerned to find, that I am become ſo much the public talk, asyoutell me, and asevery-bodytells me, I am. Your kind, yourprecautionaryregard for my fame, and the opportunity you have given me to tell my own ſtory, previous to any new accident, which heaven avert! is ſo like the warm friend I haveever found my dear Miſs Howe, that, with redoubled obligation, you bind me to be 

Your ever-grateful and affectionate CLARISSA HARLOWE.Copy of the requeſtedPREAMBLEto the clauſes in her grandfather's will, in her favour, incloſed in the preceding letter.
AS the particular eſtate I have mentioned and deſcribed above is principally of my own raiſing: As my three ſons have been uncommonly proſperous; and are very rich: The eldeſt by means of the unexpected benefits he reaps from his new-found mines: The ſecond, by what has, as unexpectedly, fallen in to him, on the deaths of ſeveral relations of his preſent wife, the worthy daughter by both ſides of very honourable families; over and above the very large portion which he received with her in marriage: My ſon Antony, by his Eaſt-India traffick, and ſucceſsful voyages: As furthermore my grandſon James will be ſufficiently provided for by his godmother Lovell's kindneſs to him; who, having no near relations, aſſures me, that ſhe has, as well by deed of gift, as by will, left him both her Scotiſh and Engliſh eſtates: For never (bleſſed be God therefore!) was there a family more proſperous in all its branches: And as my ſecond ſon James will very probably make it up to my grandſon, and alſo to my grand-daughter Arabella; to whom I intend no diſreſpect; nor have reaſon; for ſhe is a very hopeful and dutiful child: And as my ſons John and Antony ſeem not inclined to a marry'd life; ſo that my ſon James is the only one who has children, or is likely to have any:—For all theſe reaſons; and becauſe my deareſt and beloved grand-daughter Clariſſa Harlowe has been from infancy a matchleſs young creature in her duty to me, and admiredby all who knew her, as a very extraordinary child; I muſt therefore take the pleaſure of conſidering her, as my own peculiar child; and this, without intending offence; and I hope it will not be taken as any, ſince my ſon James can beſtow his favours accordingly, and in greater proportion, upon Miſs Arabella, and Maſter James:—Theſe, I ſay, are the reaſons which move me to diſpoſe of the above-deſcribed eſtate in the precious child's favour; who is the delight of my old age; and, I verily think, has contributed, by her amiable duty, and kind and tender regards, to prolong my life. 

Wherefore it is my expreſs will and commandment, and I injoin my three ſons John, James, and Antony, and my grandſon James, and my grand-daughter Arabella, as they value my bleſſing, and my memory, and would wiſh their own laſt wills and deſires to be fulfilled bytheirſurvivors, that they will not impugn or conteſt the following bequeſts and diſpoſitions in favour of my ſaid grand-daughter Clariſſa, altho' they ſhould not be ſtrictly conformable to law, or the forms thereof; nor ſuffer them to be controverted or diſputed on any pretence whatſoever. 

And in this confidence, &c. &c. &c. 

LETTER V. MiſsCLARISSA HARLOWE,To MiſsHOWE.
Jan. 20.I HAVE been hinder'd from proſecuting my intention. Neither nights nor mornings have been my own. My mamma has been very ill; and would have no other nurſe but me. I have not ſtirr'd from her bedſide; for ſhe kept her bed; and two nights I had the honour of ſharing it with her. 

Her diſorder was a very violent colic. The contentions of theſe fierce, theſe maſculine ſpirits, and the apprehenſion of miſchiefs that may ariſe from theincreaſing animoſity which allherehave againſt Mr. Lovelace, and his too-well known reſentful and intrepid character, ſhe cannot bear. Then the foundations laid, as ſhe dreads, for jealouſy and heart-burnings in her own family, late ſo happy and ſo united, afflict exceedingly a gentle and ſenſible mind, which has from the beginning, on all occaſions, ſacrifice its own inward ſatisfaction to outward peace. My brother and ſiſter, who uſed very often to jar, are now ſo much one, and are ſo much together (caballingwas the word that dropped from her, as if at unawares), that ſhe is full of fears of conſequences that may follow;—to my prejudice, perhaps, is her kind concern; ſince ſhe ſees that they behave to me every hour with more and more ſhyneſs and reſerve: Yet, would ſhe but exert that authority, which the ſuperiority of her fine talents gives her, all theſe family-feuds might perhaps be cruſh'd in their but-yet beginnings; eſpecially as ſhe may be aſſured, that all fitting conceſſions ſhall be made by me, not only as they are my elders, but for the ſake of ſo excellent and ſo indulgent a mother. 

For, if I may ſay to you, my dear, what I would not to any other perſon living, it is my opinion, that, had ſhe been of a temper that would have borne leſs, ſhe would have had ten times leſs to bear than ſhe has had. No commendation, you'll ſay, of the generoſity of thoſe ſpirits, which can turn to its own diſquiet ſo much condeſcending goodneſs. 

Upon my word, I am ſometimes tempted to think, that we may make the world allow for and reſpect us as we pleaſe, if we can but be ſturdy in our wills, and ſet out accordingly. It is but being theleſsbeloved for it, that's all. And, if we have power to oblige thoſe we have to do with, it will not appear tous,that we are. Our flatterers will tell us any thing ſooner than our faults. 

Were there not truth in this obſervation, is it poſſible, that my brother and ſiſter could make their very failings, their vehemences, of ſuch importance to all the family?'How will myſon,how will mynephew,take this or that meaſure? What willheſay to it? Let us conſulthimabout it;'are references always previous to every reſolution taken by his ſuperiors, whoſe will ought to be his. Well may he expect to be treated with this deference by every other perſon, when my papa himſelf, generally ſo abſolute, conſtantly pays it to him; and the more ſince his godmother's bounty has given independence to a ſpirit that was before under too little reſtraint.—But whither may theſe reflections lead me?—I know you do not love any of us, but my mamma and me; and, being above all diſguiſes, make me ſenſible that you donot,oftener than I wiſh you did.—Ought I then to add force to your diſlikes of thoſe whom I wiſh you more to like?—my father, eſpecially; for he, poor gentleman! has ſome excuſe for his impatience of contradiction. He is not naturally an ill-temper'd man; and in his perſon and air, and in his converſation too, when not under the torture of a gouty paroxyſm, every-body diſtinguiſhes the gentleman born and educated. 

Our ſex, perhaps, muſt expect to bear a littleuncourtlineſs,ſhall I call it?—from thehusband,whom, as thelover,they let know the preference their hearts gave him to all other men.—Say what they will of generoſity being amanlyvirtue; but, upon my word, my dear, I have ever yet obſerved, that it is not to be met with in that ſex one time in ten, that it is to be found in ours.—But my father was ſour'd by the cruel diſtemper I have named; which ſeized him all at once in the very prime of life, in ſo violent a manner, as to take from the moſt active of minds, ashiswas, all power of activity, and that, in all appearance, for life;—It impriſon'd, as I may ſay, his lively ſpirits inhimſelf, and turned the edge of them againſt his own peace; his extraordinary proſperity adding but to his impatiency: For thoſe, I believe, who want the feweſt earthly bleſſings, moſt regret that they want any. 

But my brother! what excuſe can be made for his haughty and moroſe temper? He is really, my dear, I am ſorry to have occaſion to ſay it, an ill-temper'd young man; and treats my mamma ſometimes—Indeed he is not dutiful.—But, poſſeſſing every-thing, he has the vice of age, mingled with the ambition of youth, and enjoys nothing—but his own haughtineſs and ill-temper, I was going to ſay.—Yet again am I adding force to your diſlikes of ſome of us.—Once, my dear, it was, perhaps, in your power to have moulded him as you pleaſed.—Could you have been my ſiſter!—Then had I had a friend in a ſiſter.—But no wonder that he don't love you now; who could nip in the bud, and that with a diſdain, let me ſay, too much of kin to his haughtineſs, a paſſion, that would not have wanted a fervor worthy of the object; and which poſſibly would havemadehim ſo.— 

But no more of this. I will proſecute my former intention in my next; which I will ſit down to as ſoon as breakfaſt is over; diſpatching this by the meſſenger whom you have ſo kindly ſent to inquire after us, on my ſilence. Mean time, I am, 

Your moſt affectionate and obliged friend and ſervant, CL. HARLOWE.LETTER VI. MiſsCLARISSA HARLOWE,To MiſsHOWE.
Harlowe-Place,Jan. 20.I WILL now reſume my narrative of proceedings here.—My brother being in a good way, altho' you may be ſure, that his reſentments are rather heighten'dthan abated by the galling diſgrace he has received, my friends (my papa and uncles, however, if not my brother and ſiſter) begin to think, that I have been treated unkindly. My mamma has been ſo good as to tell me this, ſince I ſent away my laſt. 

Nevertheleſs, I believe they all think that I receive letters from Mr. Lovelace. But Lord M. being inclin'd rather to ſupport than to blame his nephew, they ſeem to be ſo much afraid of him, that they do not put it to me, whether I do, or not; conniving on the contrary, as it ſhould ſeem, at the only method left to allay the vehemence of a ſpirit, which they have ſo much provoked: For he ſtill inſiſts upon ſatisfaction from my uncles; and this, poſſibly (for he wants not art) as the beſt way to be introduced again, with ſome advantage, into our family. And indeed my aunt Hervey has put it to my mamma, whether it were not beſt to prevail upon my brother to take a turn to his Yorkſhire eſtate, which he was intending to do before; and to tarry there till all is blown over. 

But this is very far from being his intention: For he has already begun to hint again, that he ſhall never be eaſy or ſatisfy'd, till I am marry'd; and, finding neither Mr. Symmes nor Mr. Mullins will be accepted, has propoſed Mr. Wyerley once more, on the ſcore of his great paſſion for me. This I have again rejected; and but yeſterday he mention'd one who has apply'd to him by letter, making high offers. This is Mr. Solmes;richSolmes, you know they call him. But this has not met with the attention of one ſingle ſoul. 

If none of his ſchemes of marrying me take effect, he has thoughts, I am told, of propoſing to me to go to Scotland, in order, as the compliment is, to put his houſe there in ſuch order as our own is in. But this my mamma intends to oppoſe for her own ſake; becauſe, having relieved her, as ſhe is pleaſed to ſay, of the houſhold cares (for which, my ſiſter, youknow, has no turn), they muſt again devolve upon her, if I go. And ifſhedid not oppoſe it,Iſhould; for, believe me, I have no mind to be his houſekeeper; and, I am ſure, were I to go with him, I ſhould be treated rather as a ſervant than a ſiſter:—Perhaps, not the better becauſe Iamhis ſiſter. And, if Mr. Lovelace ſhould follow me, things might be worſe than they are now. 

But I have beſought my mamma, who is apprehenſive of Mr. Lovelace's viſits, and for fear of whom my uncles never ſtir out without arms and armed ſervants, (my brother alſo being near well enough to go abroad again), to procure me permiſſion to be your gueſt for a fortnight, or ſo.—Will your mamma, think you, my dear, give me leave? 

I dare not aſk to go to my dairy-houſe, as my good grandfather would call it: For I am now afraid of being thought to have a wiſh to enjoy that independence to which his will has intitled me: And, as matters are ſituated, ſuch a wiſh would be imputed to my favour to the man whom they have now ſo great an antipathy to. And, indeed, could I be as eaſy and happy here, as I uſed to be, I would defy that man, and all his ſex; and never repent, that I have given the power of my fortune into my papa's hands. 

Juſt now, my mamma has rejoiced me, with the news, that my requeſted permiſſion is granted. Everyone thinks it beſt, that I ſhould go to you, except my brother. But he was told, that he muſt not expect to rule in every thing. I am to be ſent for into the great parlour, where are my two uncles and my aunt Hervey, and to be acquainted with this conceſſion in form. 

You know, my dear, that there is a good deal of ſolemnity among us. But never was there a family more united, in its different branches, than ours.Our uncles conſider us as their own children; and declare, that it is for our ſakes they live ſingle. So that they are adviſed with upon every article relating to, or that may affect, us. It is therefore the leſs wonder, at a time when they underſtand, that Mr. Lovelace is determin'd to pay us anamicableviſit, as he calls it (but which I am ſure cannot end ſo) that they ſhould both be conſulted upon the permiſſion I had deſired to attend you. 

I will acquaint you with what paſſed at the general leave given me to be your gueſt. And yet I know, that you will not love my brother the better for my communication. But I am angry with him myſelf, and cannot help it. And, beſides, it is proper to let you know the terms I go upon, and their motives for permitting me to go. 

Clary, ſaid my mamma, as ſoon as I enter'd the great parlour, your requeſt, to go to Miſs Howe's for a few days, has been taken into conſideration, and granted— 

Much againſt my liking, I aſſure you, ſaid my brother, rudely interrupting her. 

Son James! ſaid my father, and knit his brows. 

He was not daunted. His arm is in a ſling. He often has the mean art to look uponthat,when any thing is hinted, that may be ſuppoſed to lead towards the leaſt favour to, or reconciliation with, Mr. Lovelace.—Let thegirlthen (I am oftenthe girlwith him!) be prohibited ſeeing that vile libertine. 

No-body ſpoke. 

Do you hear, ſiſter Clary? taking their ſilence for approbation of whathehad dictated; you are not to receive viſits from Lord M's nephew. 

Every-one ſtill remained ſilent. 

Do you ſo underſtand the licence you have, Miſs? interrogated he. 

I would be glad, Sir, ſaid I, to underſtand that you are mybrother;—and thatyouwould underſtand, that you areonlymy brother. 

O the fond, fond heart! with a ſ•eer of inſult, lifting up his hands. 

Sir, ſaid I to my papa, to your juſtice I appeal: If I have deſerved reflection, let me not be ſpar'd. But if I am to be anſwerable for the raſhneſs— 

No more!—No more, of either ſide, ſaid my papa. You are not to receive the viſits of that Lovelace, tho':—Nor are you, ſon James, to reflect upon your ſiſter: She is a worthy child. 

Sir, I have done, reply'd he;—and yet I haveherhonour at heart, as much as the honour of the reſt of the family. 

Andhence,Sir, retorted I, your unbrotherly reflections upon me! 

Well, but, you obſerve, Miſs, ſaid he, that it is notI,but yourpapa,that tells you, that you are not to receive the viſits of that Lovelace. 

Couſin Harlowe, ſaid my aunt Hervey, allow me to ſay, That my couſin Clary's prudence may be confided in. 

I amconvinc'dit may, join'd my mamma. 

But, Aunt, but, Madam (put in my ſiſter) there is no hurt, I preſume, in letting my ſiſter know the condition ſhe goes to Miſs Howe upon; ſince, if he gets a knack of viſiting her there— 

You may be ſure, interrupted my uncle Harlowe, he will endeavour to ſee her there. 

So would ſuch an impudent manhere,ſaid my uncle Antony: And 'tis bettertherethanhere. 

Betterno-where,ſaid my papa.—I command you, turning to me, on pain of my diſpleaſure, that you ſee him not at all. 

I will not, Sir, in any way of encouragement, I do aſſure you; Nor at all, if I can decently avoid it. 

You know with what indifference, ſaid my mamma, ſhe has hitherto ſeen him.—Her prudence may be truſted to, as my ſiſter Hervey ſays. 

With what ap-pa-rent indifference, drolled my brother— 

Son James! ſaid my father, ſternly— 

I have done, Sir, ſaid he.—But again, in a provoking manner, reminded me of the prohibition. 

Thus ended this conference. 

Will you engage, my dear, that the hated man ſhall not come near your houſe?—But what an inconſiſtence is this, when they conſent to my going, thinking his viſitshereno otherwiſe to be avoided!—But, if he does come, I charge you, never leave us alone together. 

As I have no reaſon to doubt a welcome from your mamma, I will put every-thing in order here, and be with you in two or three days. 

Mean time, I am 

Your moſt affectionate and obliged CLARISSA HARLOWE.LETTER VII. MiſsCLARISSA HARLOWE,To MiſsHOWE.(After her return from her.)
Harlowe-Place,Feb. 20.I BEG your excuſe for not writing ſooner. Alas, my dear, I have ſad proſpects before me! My brother and ſiſter have ſucceeded in all their views. They have found out another lover for me; an hideous one:—Yet he is encouraged by every-body.—No wonder that I was order'd home ſo ſuddenly!—At an hour's warning!—No other notice, you know, than what was brought with the chariot that was to carry me back.—It was for fear, as I have been inform'd (an unworthy fear!), that I ſhould have enter'dinto any concert with Mr. Lovelace, had I known their motive for commanding me home; apprehending, 'tis evident, that I ſhould diſlike the man. 

And well might they apprehend ſo:—For who do you think he is?—No other than thatSolmes!—Could you have believed it?—And they are all determined too; my mamma with the reſt!—Dear, dear excellence! how could ſhe be thus brought over!—when I am aſſured, that, on his firſt being propoſed, ſhe was pleaſed to ſay, That, had Mr. Solmes theIndiesin poſſeſſion, and would endow me with them, ſhe ſhould not think him deſerving of her Clariſſa Harlowe. 

The reception I met with at my return, ſo different from what I uſed to meet with on every little abſence (and now I had been from them three weeks), convinced me, that I was to ſuffer for the happineſs I had had in your company and converſation for that moſt agreeable period. I will give you an account of it. 

My brother met me at the door, and gave me his hand, when I ſtepp'd out of the chariot. He bow'd very low: Pray, Miſs, favour me.—I thought it in good humour; but found it afterwards mock reſpect: And ſo he led me, in great form, I prattling all the way, inquiring of every-body's health (altho' I was ſo ſoon to ſee them, and there was hardly time for anſwers), into the great parlour; where were my father, mother, my two uncles, and my ſiſter. 

I was ſtruck all of a heap as ſoon as I enter'd, to ſee a ſolemnity which I had been ſo little uſed to on the like occaſions, in the countenance of every dear relation. They all kept their ſeats. I ran to my papa, and kneeled: Then to my mamma: And met from both a cold ſalute: From my papa, a bleſſing but halfpronounced: My mamma, indeed, called me, Child; but embraced me not with her uſual indulgent ardor. 

After I had paid my duty to my uncles, and my compliments to my ſiſter, which ſhe received with ſolemn and ſtiff form, I was bid to ſit down. But my heart was full: And I ſaid it became me to ſtand, if Icouldſtand a reception ſo awful and unuſual. I was forced to turn my face from them, and pull out my handkerchief. 

My unbrotherly accuſer hereupon ſtood forth, and charg'd me with having received no leſs thanfive or ſix viſitsat Miſs Howe's from the man they had all ſo much reaſon to hate (that was the expreſſion); notwithſtanding the commands I had received to the contrary. And he bid me deny it, if I could. 

I had never been uſed, I ſaid, to deny the truth; nor would I now. I owned I had, in the paſſed three weeks, ſeen the perſon I preſumed he meantoftenerthan five or ſix times (Pray hear me out, brother, ſaid I; for he was going to flame).—But he always came and aſked for Mrs. or Miſs Howe. 

I proceeded, That I had reaſon to believe, that both Mrs. Howe and Miſs, as matters ſtood, would much rather have excuſed his viſits; but they had more than once apologiz'd, that, having not the ſame reaſon my papa had, to forbid him their houſe, his rank and fortune intitled him to civility. 

You ſee, my dear, I made not the pleas I might have made. 

My brother ſeem'd ready to give a looſe to his paſſion: My papa put on the countenance, which always portends a gathering ſtorm: My uncles mutteringly whiſper'd: And my ſiſter aggravatingly held up her hands. While I begg'd to be heard out;—and my mamma ſaid, Let thechild,that was her kind word, be heard.— 

I hoped, I ſaid, there was no harm done: That it became not me to preſcribe to Mrs. or Miſs Howe who ſhould be their viſitors: That Mrs. Howe was always diverted with the raillery that paſſed betweenMiſs and him: That I had no reaſon to challengehergueſt formyviſitor; as I ſhould ſeem to have done, had I refuſed to go into their company, when he was with them: That I had never ſeen him out of the preſence of one or both of thoſe ladies; and had ſignify'd to him, once, on his urging for a few moments private converſation with me, that, unleſs a reconciliation were effected between my family and his, he muſt not expect, that I would countenance his viſits; much leſs give him an opportunity of that ſort. 

I told them further, That Miſs Howe ſo well underſtood my mind, that ſhe never left me a moment, while he was there: That, when he came, if I was not below in the parlour, I would not ſuffer myſelf to be called to him: Altho' I thought it would be an affectation, which would give him advantage rather than the contrary, if I had left company when he came in; or refuſed to enter into it, when I found he would ſtay any time. 

My brother heard me out with ſuch a kind of impatience, as ſhew'd he was reſolved to be diſſatisfy'd with me, ſay what I would, The reſt, as the event has proved, behav'd as if theywouldhave been ſatiſfy'd, had they not further points to carry, by intimidating me. All this made it evident, as I mention'd above, that they themſelves expected not my voluntary compliance; and was a tacit confeſſion of the diſagreeableneſs of the perſon they had to propoſe. 

I was no ſooner ſilent, than mybrotherſwore, altho' in my papa's preſence (ſwore, uncheck'd either by eye or countenance), That, for his part, he wouldneverbe reconciled to that libertine: And that he would renounce me for a ſiſter, if I encouraged the addreſſes of a man ſo obnoxious to them all. 

A man who had like to have been my brother's murderer, myſiſterſaid, with a face even burſting with reſtraint of paſſion. 

The poor Bella has, you know, a plump, high-fed face, if I may be allow'd the expreſſion.—You, I know, will forgive me for this liberty of ſpeech, ſooner than I can myſelf: Yet, how can one be ſuch a reptile, as not to turn when trampled upon!— 

Mypapa,with vehemence both of action and voice (my father has, you know, a terrible voice, when he is angry!), told me, that I had met with too much indulgence, in being allow'd to refuſethisgentleman, and theothergentleman; and it was nowhisturn to be obey'd. 

Very true, mymammaſaid:—And hoped his will would not now be diſputed by a child ſo favour'd. 

To ſhew they were all of a ſentiment, my uncleHarloweſaid, He hoped his beloved niece only wanted to know her papa's will, to obey it. 

And my uncleAntony,in his rougher manner, That I would not give them reaſon to apprehend, that I thought my grandfather's favour to me had made me independent of them all.—If I did, he could tell me, the will could be ſet aſide, andſhould. 

I was aſtoniſh'd, you muſt needs think.—Whoſe addreſſes now, thought I, is this treatment preparative to!—Mr. Wyerley's again!—or whoſe?—And then, as high compariſons, whereſelfis concern'd, ſooner than low, come into young peoples heads; be it for whom it will, this is wooing as the Engliſh did for the heireſs of Scotland in the time of Edward the ſixth.—But that it could be for Solmes, how ſhould it enter into my head? 

I did not know, I ſaid, that I had given occaſion for this harſhneſs: I hoped I ſhould always have a juſt ſenſe of their favour to me, ſuperadded to the duty I ow'd as a daughter and a niece: But that I was ſo much ſurpriſed at a reception ſo unuſual and unexpected, that I hoped my papa and mamma would give me leave to retire, in order to recollect myſelf. 

No one gainſaying, I made my ſilent compliments, and withdrew;—leaving my brother and ſiſter, as I thought, pleaſed; and as if they wanted to congratulate each other on having occaſioned ſo ſevere a beginning to be made with me. 

I went up to my chamber, and there, with my faithful Hannah, deplor'd the determin'd face which the new propoſal, it was plain they had to make me, wore. 

I had not recover'd myſelf when I was ſent for down to tea. I begg'd, by my maid, to be excus'd attending: But, on the repeated command, went down, with as much chearfulneſs as I could aſſume; and had a new fault to clear myſelf of: For my brother, ſo pregnant a thing is determin'd ill-will, by intimations equally rude and intelligible, charg'd my deſire of being excus'd coming down, to ſullens, becauſe a certain perſon had been ſpoken againſt, upon whom, as he ſuppoſed, my fancy ran. 

I could eaſily anſwer you, Sir, ſaid I, as ſuch a reflection deſerves: But I forbear. If I do not find a brother inyou,you ſhall have a ſiſter inme. 

Pretty meekneſs! Bella whiſperingly ſaid; looking at my brother, and lifting up her lip in contempt. 

He, with an imperious air, bid medeſervehis love, and I ſhould be ſure tohaveit. 

As we ſat, my mamma, in her admirable manner, expatiated upon brotherly and ſiſterly love; indulgently blam'd my brother and ſiſter upon having taken up diſpleaſure too lightly againſt me; and politically, if I may ſo ſay, anſwer'd for my obedience to my papa's will.—Then it would be all well,my papa was pleas'd to ſay:Then they ſhould dote upon me,was my brother's expreſſion:Love me as well as ever,was my ſiſter's: And my uncles,That I ſhould then be the pride of their hearts.—But, alas! what a forfeiture of all theſe muſt I make! 

This was the reception I had on my return from you! 

Mr. Solmes came in before we had done tea. My uncle Antony preſented him to me, as a gentleman he had a particular friendſhip for. My uncle Harlowe in terms equally favourable for him. My father ſaid, Mr. Solmes is my friend, Clariſſa Harlowe. My mamma look'd at him, and look'd at me, now-and-•hen, as he ſat near me, I thought with concern.—I ather,with eyes appealing for pity.—Athim,when I could glance at him, with diſguſt, little ſhort of affrightment. While my brother and ſiſter Mr.Solmes'd-him, andSirr'd-him up, with high favour. So ca•eſs'd, in ſhort, by all;—yet ſuch a wretch!—But I will at preſent only add, My humble thanks and duty to your honour'd mamma (to whom I will particularly write, to expreſs the grateful ſenſe I have of her goodneſs to me); and that I am, 

Your ever obliged CL. HARLOWE.LETTER VIII. MiſsCLARISSA HARLOWE,To MiſsHOWE.
Feb. 24.THEY drive on here at a furious rate. The man lives here, I think. He courts them, and is more and more a favourite. Such terms, ſuch ſettlements! That's the cry! 

O, my dear, that I had not reaſon to deplore the family fault, immenſely rich as they all are! But this I may the more unreſervedly ſay to you, as we have often join'd in the ſame concern: I, for a father and uncles; you, for a mother; in every other reſpect faultleſs. 

Hitherto, I ſeem to be delivered over to my brother, who pretends as great love to me as ever. 

You may believe, I have been very ſincere with him. But he affects to railly me, and not to believe it poſſible, that one, ſo dutiful and ſo diſcreet as his ſiſter Clary, can reſolve to diſoblige all her friends. 

Indeed, I tremble at the proſpect before me; for it is evident, that they are ſtrangely determin'd. 

My father and mother induſtriouſly avoid giving me opportunity of ſpeaking to them alone. They aſk not for my approbation, intending, as it ſhould ſeem, toſuppoſeme into their will. And with them I ſhall hope to prevail, or with no-body. They have not theintereſtin compelling me, as my brother and ſiſter have: I ſay leſs therefore to them, reſerving my whole force for an audience with my father, if he will permit me a patient ear. How difficult is it, my dear, to give a negative, where both duty and inclination join to make one wiſh to oblige!— 

I have already ſtood the ſhock of three of this man's particular viſits, beſides my ſhare in his more general ones; and find it is impoſſible I ſhould ever endure him. He has but a very ordinary ſhare of underſtanding; is very illiterate; knows nothing but the value of eſtates, and how to improve them; and what belongs to land-jobbing, and huſbandry. Yet am I as one ſtupid, I think. They have begun ſo cruelly with me, that I have not ſpirit enough to aſſert my own negative. 

My good Mrs. Norton they had endeavour'd, it ſeems, to influence, before I came home: So intent are they to carry their point: And her opinion not being to their liking, ſhe has been told, that ſhe would do well to decline viſiting here for the preſent: Yet ſhe is the perſon of all the world, next to my mamma, the moſt likely to prevail upon me, were the meaſures they are engag'd in, reaſonable meaſures; or ſuch as ſhe could think ſo. 

My aunt likewiſe having ſaid, that ſhe did not think her niece could ever be brought to like Mr. Solmes, has been obliged to learn another leſſon. 

I am to have a viſit from her to-morrow. And,•ince I have refuſed ſo much as to hear from my brother and ſiſter what the noble ſettlements are to be, ſhe is to acquaint me with the particulars; and to•eceive from me my determination: For my father, I am told, will not have patience but toſuppoſe,that I ſhall ſtand in oppoſition to his will. 

Mean time it has been ſignify'd to me, that it will be acceptable, if I do not think of going to church next Sunday. 

The ſame ſignification was made me for laſt Sunday; and I obey'd. They are apprehenſive, that Mr. Lovelace will be there, with deſign to come home with me. 

Help me, dear Miſs Howe, to a little of your charming ſpirit: I never more wanted it. 

The man, you may ſuppoſe, has no reaſon to boaſt of his progreſs with me. He has not the ſenſe to ſay any thing to the purpoſe. His courtſhip, indeed, is tothem; and my brother pretends to court me as his proxy, truly! I utterly to my brother refuſe his application; but thinking a perſon ſo well received, and recommended, by all my family, intitled to good manners, all I ſay againſt him is affectedly attributed to coyneſs: And he, not being ſenſible of his own imperfections, believes that my avoiding him when I can, and the reſerves I expreſs, are owing to nothing elſe:—For, as I ſaid, all his courtſhip is tothem; and I have no opportunity of ſaying No, to one who aſks me not the queſtion. And ſo, with an air ofmanniſhſuperiority, he ſeems rather to pity the baſhful girl, than apprehend that he ſhall not ſucceed. 

February 25.I have had the expected conference with my aunt. 

I have been obliged to hear the man's propoſal•from her; and all their motives for eſpouſing him a they do. I am even loth to mention, how equally unjuſt it is for him to make ſuch offers, or for thoſe I am bound to reverence to accept of them. I hate him more than before. One great eſtate is already obtained at the expence of the relations to it, tho' diſtant relations; my brother's, I mean, by his god mother: And this has given the hope, however chimerical that hope, of procuring others; and that my own, at leaſt, may revert to the family: And yet in my opinion, the world is but one great family originally it was ſo: What then is this narrow ſelfiſhneſs that reigns in us, but relationſhip remembre•againſt relationſhip forgot? 

But here, upon my abſolute refuſal of him upo•anyterms, have I had a ſignification made me, tha•wounds me to the heart. How can I tell it you? Ye•I muſt. It is, my dear, that I muſt not, for a mon•to come, or till licence obtained, correſpond withanybody out of the houſe. 

My brother, upon my aunt's report (made, however, as I am informed, in the gentleſt manner, an•even giving remote hopes, which ſhe had no commiſſion from me to give), brought me, in authoritative terms, the prohibition. 

Not to Miſs Howe? ſaid I. 

No, not to Miſs Howe,Madam,tauntingly: For have you not acknowleg'd, that Lovelace is a favourite there? 

See, my dear Miſs Howe!— 

And do you think, brother, this is the way?— 

Doyoulook to that:—But your letters will be ſtopt, I can tell you.—And away he flung. 

My ſiſter came to me ſoon after.—Siſter Clary, you are going on in a fine way, I underſtand. But, asthere are people who are ſuppoſed to harden you againſt your duty, I am to tell you, that it will be taken well, if you avoid viſits or viſitings for a week or two, till further order. 

Can this be from thoſe who have authority— 

Ask them; ask them, child, with a twirl of her finger.—I have deliver'd my meſſage. Your papa will be obey'd. He is willing to hope you to be all obedience; and would prevent allincitementsto refractorineſs. 

I knew my duty, I ſaid; and hoped I ſhould not find impoſſible conditions annexed to it. 

A pert young creature, vain and conceited, ſhe called me. I was the only judge, in my own wife opinion, of what was right and fit. She, for her part, had long ſeen through my ſpecious ways: And now I ſhould ſhew every-body what I was at bottom. 

Dear Bella, ſaid I! hands and eyes lifted up,—why all this?—Dear, dear Bella, why— 

None of your dear, dear Bella's to me.—I tell you, I ſee thro' yourwitchcrafts.—That was her ſtrange word: And away ſhe flung; adding, as ſhe went,—And ſo will every-body elſe very quickly, I dare ſay. 

Bleſs me, ſaid I to myſelf, what a ſiſter have I!—How have I deſerv'd this? Then I again regretted my grandfather's too diſtinguiſhing goodneſs to me. 

Feb. 25. in the evening .What my brother and ſiſter have ſaid againſt me, I cannot tell:—But I am in heavy diſgrace with my papa. 

I was ſent for down to tea. I went with a very chearful aſpect: But had occaſion ſoon to change it. 

Such a ſolemnity in every-body's countenance!—My mamma's eyes were fixed upon the tea-cups; and when ſhe looked up, it was heavily, as if her eyelids had weights upon them; and then not to me. My papa ſat half-aſide in his elbow-chair, that hishead might be turn'd from me; his hands folded, and waving, as it were, up and down; his fingers, poor dear gentleman! in motion, as if angry to the very ends of them. My ſiſter ſat ſwelling. My brother looked at me with ſcorn, having meaſured me, as I may ſay, with his eyes, as I enter'd, from head to foot. My aunt was there, and looked upon me, as if with kindneſs reſtrained, bending coldly to my compliment to her, as ſhe ſat; and then caſt an eye firſt on my brother, then on my ſiſter, as if to give the reaſon (ſo I am willing to conſtrue it) of her unuſual ſtiffneſs.—Bleſs me, my dear! that they ſhould chooſe to intimidate rather than invite a mind, till now, no•thought either unperſuadable or ungenerous!— 

I took my ſeat. Shall I make tea, Madam, to my mamma?—I always uſed, you know, my dear, to make tea. 

No! a very ſhort ſentence, in one very ſhort word was the expreſſive anſwer: And ſhe was pleaſed to take the caniſter in her own hand. 

My ſiſter's Betty attending, my brother bid her go:—He would fill the water. 

My heart was up at my mouth. I did not know what to do with myſelf. What is to follow? thought I 

Juſt after the ſecond diſh, out ſtept my mamma.—A word with you, ſiſter Hervey! taking her in he•hand. Preſently my ſiſter dropt away. Then my brother. So I was left alone with my papa. 

He looked ſo very ſternly, that my heart failed me as twice or thrice I would have addreſſed myſelf to him: Nothing but ſolemn ſilence on all hands having paſſed before. 

At laſt, I aſked, If it were his pleaſure, that I ſhould pour him out another diſh? 

He anſwer'd me with the ſame angry monoſyllable which I had received from my mamma before; and then aroſe, and walked about the room. I aroſe too, with intent to throw myſelf at his feet; but was toomuch over-awed by his ſternneſs, even to make ſuch an expreſſion of my duty to him, as my heart overflowed with. 

At laſt, as he ſupported himſelf, becauſe of his gout, on the back of a chair, I took a little more courage; and approaching him, beſought him to acquaint me, in what I had offended him? 

He turn'd from me, and, in a ſtrong voice, Clariſſa Harlowe, ſaid he, know, that I will be obey'd. 

God forbid, Sir, that you ſhould not!—I have never yet oppoſed your will— 

Nor I your whimſies, Clariſſa Harlowe, interrupted he.—Don't let me run the fate of all who ſhew•ndulgence to your ſex; To be the more contradicted for mine to you. 

My papa, you know, my dear, has not (any more than my brother) a kind opinion of our ſex; altho' there is not a more condeſcending wife in the world than my mamma. 

I was going to make proteſtations of duty.—No proteſtations, girl!—No words.—I will not be prated to!—I will be obey'd!—I have no child.—I will have no child, but an obedient one. 

Sir, you never had reaſon, I hope— 

Tell me not what I neverhad,but what Ihave,and what Iſhallhave.— 

Good Sir, be pleaſed to hear me—My brother and my ſiſter, I fear— 

Your brother and ſiſter ſhall not be ſpoken againſt, girl!—They have a juſt concern for the honour of my family. 

And I hope, Sir,— 

Hope nothing.—Tell me not ofhopes,but offacts.I ask nothing of you but what is in your power to comply with, and what it is your duty to comply with. 

Then, Sir, I will comply with it.—But yet I hope from your goodneſs,— 

No expoſtulations!—Nobut's,girl!—No qualifyings!—I will be obey'd, I tell you!—and chearfully too!—or you are no child of mine!— 

I wept. 

Let me beſeech you, my dear and ever-honoured papa (and I dropt down on my knees) that I may have only your's and my mamma's will, and not my brother's, to obey.—I was going on; but he was pleaſed to withdraw, leaving me on the floor; ſaying, That he would not hear me thus by ſubtilty and cunning aiming to diſtinguiſh away my duty; repeating, that he would be obey'd. 

My heart is too full;—ſo full, that it may endanger my duty, were I to unburden it to you on this occaſion: So I will lay down my pen.—But can—Yet, poſitively, I will lay down my pen!— 

LETTER IX. MiſsCLARISSA HARLOWE,To MiſsHOWE.
Feb. 26. in the morning.MY aunt, who ſtaid here laſt night, made me viſit this morning, as ſoon as it was light. She tells me, that I was left alone with my papa yeſterday on purpoſe that he might talk with me on my expecte•obedience; but that he own'd he was put beſide his purpoſe by reflecting on ſomething my brother had tol•him in my disfavour, and by his impatience but to ſuppoſe, that ſuch a gentle ſpirit as mine had hitherto ſeem'd to be, ſhould preſume to diſpute his will, in•oint where the advantage of the whole family was to•e ſo greatly promoted by my compliance. 

I find, by a few words which dropt from her unawares, that they have all an abſolute dependence upon what they ſuppoſe to be a meekneſs in my temper But in this they may be miſtaken; for I verily think upon a ſtrict examination of myſelf, that I have almoſtas much in me of my father's as of my mother's family. 

My uncle Harlowe, it ſeems, is againſt driving me upon extremities: But his unbrotherly nephew has engaged, that the regard I have for my reputation, and my principles, will bring meround to my duty,that's the expreſſion. Perhaps I ſhall have reaſon to wiſh I had not known this. 

My aunt adviſes me to ſubmit, for the preſent, to the interdicts they have laid me under; and, indeed, to encourage Mr. Solmes's addreſs. I have abſolutely refuſed the latter, let what will, as I have told her, be the conſequence. The viſiting prohibition I will conform to. But as to that of not correſponding with you, nothing but the menace, that our letters ſhall be intercepted, can engage my obſervation of it. 

She believes, that this order is from my father, without conſulting my mother upon it: And that purely, as ſhe ſuppoſes, in conſideration to me, left I ſhould mortally offend him; and this from the incitements ofotherpeople (meaning you and Miſs Lloyd, I make no doubt), rather than by my own will. For ſtill, as ſhe tells me, he ſpeaks kind and praiſeful things of me. 

Here is clemency! Here is indulgence!—And ſo it is, To prevent a headſtrong child, as a good prince would wiſh to do diſaffected ſubjects, from running into rebellion, and ſo forfeiting every-thing! But this is all my brother's young man's wiſdom; a blotter without a head, and a brother without a heart! 

How happy might I have been with any other brother in the world, but Mr. James Harlowe; and with any other ſiſter, buthisſiſter! Wonder not, my dear! that I, who uſed to chide you for theſe ſort of liberties with my relations, now am more undutiful than you ever were unkind. I cannot bear the thought of being deprived of the principal pleaſure ofmy life; for ſuch is your converſation by perſon and by letter. And who beſides can bear to be made the dupe of ſuch low cunning, operating with ſuch high and arrogant paſſions? 

But can you, my dear Miſs Howe, condeſcend to carry on a private correſpondence with me? If you can, there is one way I have thought of, by which it may be done. 

You muſt remember the Green Lane, as we call it, that runs by the ſide of the wood-houſe and poultry-yard, where I keep my bantams, pheaſants, and pea-hens, which generally engage my notice twice a-day; the more my favourites, becauſe they were my grandfather's, and recommended to my care by him; and therefore brought hither from my dairy-houſe, ſince his death. 

The lane is lower than the floor of the wood-houſe; and in the ſide of the wood-houſe the boards are rotted away down to the floor, for half an ell together, in ſeveral places. Hannah can ſtep into the lane, and make a mark with chalk where a letter or parcel may be puſh'd in, under ſome ſticks; which may be ſo managed, as to be an unſuſpected cover for the written depoſites from either. 

I HAVE been juſt now to look at the place, and find it will anſwer. So your faithful Robert may, without coming near the houſe, and as only paſſing thro' the green lane, which leads to two or three farm-houſes (out of livery, if you pleaſe), very eaſily take from thence my letters, and depoſite yours. 

This place is the more convenient, becauſe it is ſeldom reſorted to, but by myſelf or Hannah, on the above-mentioned account; for it is the general ſtore-houſe for firing; the wood for conſtant uſe being nearer the houſe. 

One corner of this being ſeparated off for the rooſting-place of my little poultry, either ſhe or I ſhall never want a pretence to go thither. 

Try, my dear, the ſucceſs of a letter this way; and give me your opinion and advice what to do, in this diſgraceful ſituation, as I cannot but call it; and what you think of my proſpects; and what you would do in my caſe. 

But, before-hand, I muſt tell you, that your advice muſt not run in favour of this Solmes: And yet it is very likely they will endeavour to engage your mamma, in order to induce you, who have ſuch an influence over me, to favour him. 

Yet, on ſecond thoughts, if you incline to that ſide of the queſtion, I would have you write your whole mind. Determin'd, as I think I am, and cannot help it, I would at leaſt give a patient hearing to what may be ſaid on the other ſide. For my regards are not ſo much engag'd (upon my word, they are not; I know not myſelf if they be) to another perſon, as ſome of my friends ſuppoſe; and as you, giveing way to your lively vein, upon his laſt viſits, affected to ſuppoſe. What preſerable favour I may have for him to any other perſon, is owing more to the uſage he has received, and for my ſake borne, than to any perſonal conſideration. 

I write a few lines of grateful acknowlegement to your mamma for her favours to me in the late happy period. I fear I ſhall never know ſuch another!—I hope ſhe will forgive me, that I did not write ſooner. 

The bearer, if ſuſpected and examin'd, is to producethat,as the only one he carries. How do needleſs watchfulneſs and undue reſtraint produce artifice and contrivance! I ſhould abhor theſe clandeſtine correſpondencies, were they not forced upon me. They have ſo mean, ſo low an appearance, to myſelf, that I think I ought not to expect, that you ſhould take part in them. 

But why (as I have alſo expoſtulated with my aunt) muſt I be puſhed into a ſtate, which, altho' I reverence, I have no wiſh to enter into?—Why ſhould not my brother, ſo many years older, and ſo earneſt to ſee me engaged, be firſt engaged?—And, if not ſo, why not my ſiſter be firſt provided for? 

But here I conclude theſe unavailing expoſtulations, with the aſſurance, that I am, and ever will be, 

Your affectionate CLARISSA HARLOWE.LETTER X. MiſsHOWE,To MiſsCLARISSA HARLOWE.
Febr. 27.WHAT odd heads ſome people have!—Miſs Clariſſa Harlowe to be ſacrificed in marriage to Mr. Roger Solmes! Aſtoniſhing! 

I muſt not,you ſay,give my advice in favour of this man!—You now half-convince me, my dear, that you are ally'd to the family that could think of ſo prepoſterous a match, or you could never have had the leaſt notion of my adviſing in his favour. 

Ask me for his picture: You know I have a good hand at drawing an ugly likeneſs. But I'll ſee a little farther firſt: For who knows what may happen; ſince matters are in ſuch a train; and ſince you have not thecourageto oppoſe ſo overwhelming a torrent. 

You ask me to help you to a little of my ſpirit. Are you in earneſt? But it will not now, I doubt, do you ſervice.—It will not fit naturally upon you. You are your mamma's girl, think what you will, and have violent ſpirits to contend with. Alas! my dear, you ſhould have borrowed ſome of mine a little ſooner;—that is to ſay, before you had given the management of your eſtate into the hands of thoſe who think they have a prior claim to it. What, tho'afather's?—Has not that father two elder children?—And do they not both bear his ſtamp and image, more than you do?—Pray, my dear, call me not to account for this free queſtion; leſt yourapplicationof my meaning prove to be as ſevere asthat. 

Now I have launch'd out a little, indulge me one word more in the ſame ſtrain: I will be decent, I promiſe you.—I think you might have known, that AVARICE and ENVY are two paſſions that are not to be ſatisfy'd, the one bygiving,the other by the envied perſon's continuing todeſerveandexcel.—Fuel, fuel both, all the world over, to flames inſatiate and devouring. 

But ſince you ask formyopinion, you muſt tell me all you know or ſurmiſe oftheirinducements. And if you will not forbid me to make extracts from your letters, for the entertainment of my couſin in the little iſland, who longs to hear more of your affairs, it will be very obliging. 

But you are ſo tender of ſome people, who have no tenderneſs for any body but themſelves, that I muſt conjure you to ſpeak out. Remember, that a friendſhip like ours admits of no reſerves. You may truſt my impartiality: It would be an affront to your own judgment, if you did not: For do you notaſkmy advice? And have you not taught me, that friendſhip ſhould never give a bias againſt juſtice?—Juſtify them therefore, if you can. Let us ſee if there be anyſenſe,whether ſufficientreaſonor not, in their choice. At preſent, I cannot (and yet I know a good deal of your family) have any conception, howallof them, your mamma in particular, and your aunt Hervey, can join with the reſt againſt judgments given. As to ſome of the others, I cannot wonder at any thing they do, or attempt to do, where Self is concern'd. 

You ask, Why may not your brother be firſt engag'd in wedlock?—I'll tell you why: His temper and his arrogance are too well known to induce women hewould aſpire to, to receive his addreſſes, notwithſtanding his great independent acquiſitions, and ſtill greater proſpects. Let me tell you, my dear, thoſe acquiſitions have given him more pride, than reputation. To me he is the moſt intolerable creature that I ever ſaw. The treatment you blame, he merited from one whom he would have addreſſed with the air of a perſon intending to confer, rather than hoping to receive a favour. I ever loved to mortify proud and inſolent ſpirits. What, think you, makes me bear Hickman near me, but that the man is humble, and knows his diſtance? 

As to your queſtion, Why your elder ſiſter may not be firſt provided for? I anſwer, Becauſe ſhe muſt have no man, but who has a great and clear eſtate; that's one thing. Another is, Becauſe ſhe has a younger ſiſter:—Pray, my dear, be ſo good as to tell me, what man of a great and clear eſtate would think of that elder ſiſter, while the younger were ſingle? 

You are all too rich to be happy, child. For muſt not each of you, by the conſtitutions of your family, marry to beſtillricher? People who know in what theirmainexcellence conſiſts are not to be blam'd (are they?) for cultivating and improving what they think moſt valuable? Is true happineſs any part of your family-view?—So far from it, that none of your family, but yourſelf, could be happy were they not rich. So let them fret on, grumble and grudge, and accumulate; and wondering what ails them that they have not happineſs when they have riches, think the cauſe is want of more; and ſo go on heaping up, till death, as greedy an accumulator as themſelves, gathers them into his garner! 

Well then once more, I ſay, do you, my dear, tellmewhat you know of their avowed and general motives; and I will tellyoumore than you will tellmeof their failings! Your aunt Hervey, you ſay,See p.46.has toldyou:—Why, as I hinted above, muſt I ask you to letme know them; when you condeſcend to ask my advice on the occaſion? 

That they prohibit your correſponding withme,is a wiſdom I neither wonder at, nor blame them for: Since it is an evidence to me, that they know their own folly: And if they do, is it ſtrange that they ſhould be afraid to truſt another's judgment upon it? 

I am glad you have found out a way to correſpond with me. I approve it much. I ſhallmore,if this firſt tryal of it proves ſucceſsful. But ſhould it not, and ſhould it fall into their hands, it would not concern me, but for your ſake. 

We had heard before you wrote, that all was not right between your relations and you, at your coming home: That Mr. Solmes viſited you, and that with a proſpect of ſucceſs. But I concluded, the miſtake lay in the perſon; and that his addreſs was to Miſs Arabella: And indeed had ſhe been as good-natur'd as your plump ones generally are, I ſhould have thought her too good for him by half:—Thought I, thismuſtbe the thing; and my beloved friend is ſent for to adviſe and aſſiſt in her nuptial preparations. Who knows, ſaid I to my mamma, but that, when the man has thrown aſide his yellow, full-buckled peruke, and his broad-brimm'd beaver, both of which I ſuppoſe were Sir Oliver's Beſt of long ſtanding, he may cut a tolerable figure dangling to church with Miſs Bell!—The woman, as ſhe obſerves,ſhouldexcel the man in features: And where can ſhe match ſo well for a foil? 

I indulged this ſurmize againſt rumour, becauſe I could not believe, that the abſurdeſt people in England could be ſoveryabſurd, as to think of this man for you. 

We heard moreover, that you received no viſitors: I could aſſign no reaſon for this; except that the preparations for your ſiſter were to be private, and the ceremony ſudden: Miſs Lloyd and Miſs Biddulph were with me to inquire what I knew of this; and ofyour not being at church, either morning or afternoon, the Sunday after your return from us; to the diſappointment of a little hundred of your admirers, to uſe their words. It was eaſy for me to gueſs the reaſon to be what you confirm:—Their apprehenſions that Lovelace would be there, and attempt to wait on you home. 

My mamma takes very kindly your compliments in your letter to her. Her words upon reading it were;'Miſs Clariſſa Harlowe is an admirable young lady; Where-ever ſhe goes, ſhe confers a favour: Whomever ſhe leaves, ſhe fills with regret.'—And then a little comparative reflection;'O my Nancy, that you had a little of her ſweet obligingneſs!' 

No matter. The praiſe was yours. You are me; and I enjoy'd it. The more enjoy'd it, becauſe—ſhall I tell you the truth?—Becauſe I think myſelf as well as I am—Were it but for this reaſon; That had I twenty brother James's, and twenty ſiſter Bell's, not one of them, nor all of them join'd together, would dare to treat me, as yours preſume to treat you. The perſon who will bear much ſhall have much to bear, all the world•hro': 'Tis your own ſentiment, grounded upon the ſtrongeſt inſtance that can be given in your own family; tho' you have ſo little improv'd by it. 

The reſult is this, That I am fitter forthisworld than you: You for thenextthan me;—that's the difference.—But long, long, for my ſake, and for hundreds of ſakes, may it be, before you quit us for company more congenial, and more worthy of you!— 

I communicated to my mamma the account you give of your ſtrange reception; alſo what a horrid wretch they have found out for you; and the compulſory treatment they give you. It only ſet her on magnifying her lenity to me, on mytyrannicalbehaviour, as ſhewillcall it (mothers muſt have their way, you know), to the man ſhe ſo warmly recommends, againſt whom, it ſeems, there can be no juſt exception;and expatiating upon the complaiſance I owe her for her indulgence. So I believe I muſt communicate to her nothing farther,—eſpecially as I know ſhe would condemn the correſpondence between us, and That between you and Lovelace, as a clandeſtine and undutiful thing: Forduty implicitis her cry. And moreover ſhe lends a pretty open ear to the preachments of that ſtarch old bachelor your uncle Antony; and for an example toherdaughter, would be more careful how ſhe takes your part, be the cauſe ever ſo juſt. Yet is not this right policy neither. For people who will allow nothing, will be granted nothing: In other words, thoſe who aim at carrying too many points will not be able to carry any. 

But can you divine, my dear, what that old preachment-making plump-hearted ſoul, your uncle Antony, means, by his frequent amblings hither?—There is ſuch ſmirking and ſmiling between my mamma and him! Such mutual praiſes of oeconomy; and'Thatis my way!'—and'ThisI do!'—and'I am glad it hasyourapprobation, Sir!'—and'Youlook into every thing, Madam!'—'Nothing would be done, if Idid not!'—Such exclamations againſt ſervants: Such exaltings of ſelf!—Anddear-heart,andgood-lack!—and 'las-a-day!—And now and then their converſation ſinking into a whiſpering accent, ifIcome croſs them!—I'll tell you, my dear, I don't above half like it. 

Only that theſe old bachelors uſually take as many years to reſolve upon matrimony, as they can reaſonably expect to live; or I ſhould be ready to fire upon his viſits; and recommend Mr. Hickman, as a much properer man, to my mamma's acceptance: For what he wants in years, he makes up in gravity: And if you will not chide me, I will ſay, That there is a primneſs inboth,eſpecially when the man has preſumed too much with me upon my mamma's favour for him, and is under diſcipline on that account, asmakes them ſeem near of kin: And then in contemplation of my ſaucineſs, and what they both bear from it, they ſigh away!—and ſeem ſo mightily to compaſſionate each other, that if Pity be but one remove from Love, I am in no danger, while they both are in a great deal, and don't know it. 

Now, my dear, I know you will be upon me with your grave airs:So in for the lamb,as the ſaying is,in for the ſheep; and do you yourſelf look about you: For I'll have a pull with you, by way of being aforehand. Hannibal, we read, always adviſed to attack the Romans upon their own territories. 

You are pleaſed to ſay, andupon your word too!—That yourregards(a mighty quaint word foraffections) are not ſo much engag'd, as ſome of your friends ſuppoſe, to another perſon.What need you give one to imagine, my dear, that the laſt month or two has been a period extremely favourable to thatotherperſon!—whom it has made an obliger of the niece for his patience with the uncles. 

But, to p•ſs that by,—So muchengag'd!—How much,my dear? Shall I infer?Some of your friendsſuppoſea great deal.—You ſeem to owna little. 

Don't be angry. It is all fair: Becauſe you have not acknowleg'd to me Thatlittle.People, I have heard you ſay, who affect ſecrets always excite curioſity. 

But you proceed with a kind of drawback upon your averrment, as if recollection had given you a doubt.—You know not yourſelf, if they be[ſo much engag'd]. Was it neceſſary to ſay This, to me?—and to ſay itupon your wordtoo?—But you know beſt.—Yet you don't neither, I believe. For a beginning Love is acted by a ſubtile ſpirit; and oftentimes diſcovers itſelf to a byſtander, when the perſon poſſeſs'd (why ſhould I not call itpoſſeſs'd?)knows not it has ſuch a demon. 

But further you ſay, What PREFERABLEfavouryou may have for him, to any other perſon, is owing more to the uſage he has received, and for your ſake borne, than to any perſonal conſideration. 

This is generouſly ſaid. It is in character.. But, O my friend, depend upon it, you are in danger. Depend upon it,. whether you know it or not, you are a little in for't. Your native generoſity and greatneſs of mind indanger you: All your friends, by fightingagainſthim with impolitic violence, fightfor him.And Lovelace, my life for yours, notwithſtanding all his veneration and aſſiduities, has ſeen further than that veneration and thoſe aſſiduities (ſo well calculated to your meridian) will let him own he has ſeen.—Has ſeen, in ſhort, that his work is doing for him more effectually than he could do it for himſelf. And have you not before now ſaid, That nothing is ſo penetrating as the vanity of a lover; ſince it makes the perſon who has it frequently ſee in his own favour what isnot; and hardly ever fail of obſerving whatis.And who ſays Lovelace wants vanity? 

In ſhort, my dear, it is my opinion, and that from the eaſineſs of his heart and behaviour, that he has ſeen more thanIhave ſeen; more than you thinkcouldbe ſeen;—more than I believe youyourſelfknow, or elſe you would have letmeknow it. 

Already, in order to reſtrain him from reſenting the indignities he has received, and which are daily offer'd him, he has prevailed upon you to correſpond with him privately. I know he has nothing to boaſt of fromwhatyou have written. But is not his inducing you to receive his letters, and to anſwer them, a great point gain'd?—By your inſiſting, that he ſhould keep this correſpondence private, it appears, that there isone ſecret,that you do not wiſh the world ſhould know: Andheis maſter of that ſecret. He is indeedhimſelf,as I may ſay, that ſecret!—What an intimacy does this beget for the lover!—How is it diſtancing the parent!— 

Yet who, as things are ſituated, can blame you?—Your condeſcenſion has no doubt hitherto prevente•great miſchiefs: It muſt be continued, for the ſam•reaſons, while the cauſe remains. You are draw•in by a perverſe fate, againſt inclination: But cuſtom with ſuch laudable purpoſes, will reconcile the inconveniency, andmakean inclination.—And I would adviſe you (as you would wiſh to manage, on an occaſion ſo critical with that prudence which governs all your actions) not to be afraid of entering upon a cloſe examination into the true ſprings and grounds of this yourgeneroſityto that happy man. 

It is my humble opinion, I tell you frankly, that, on inquiry, it will come out to be LOVE.—Don't ſtart, my dear!—Has not your man himſelf had natural philoſophy enough to obſerve already to your aunt Hervey, that Love takes the deepeſt root in the ſteadieſt minds? The duce take his ſly penetration, I was going to ſay; for this was ſix or ſeven weeks ago. 

Ihave been tinctured, you know. Nor, on the cooleſt reflection, could I account how, and when, the jaundice began: But had been over head and ears, as the ſaying is, but for ſome of that advice from you, which I now return you. Yetmyman was not half ſo—Sowhat,my dear?—To be ſure Lovelace is a charming fellow.—And were he only—But I will not make youglow,as you read!—Uponmy word,I won't.—Yet, my dear, don't you find at your heart ſomewhat unuſual make it go throb, throb, throb, as you read juſt here?—If you do, don't be aſham'd to own it.—It is yourgeneroſity,my love! that's all.—But, as the Roman augur ſaid, Caeſar, beware of the ides of March! 

Adieu, my deareſt friend, and forgive; and very ſpeedily, by the new-found expedient, tell me, that you forgive 

Your ever-affectionate ANNA HOWE.LETTER XI. MiſsCLARISSA HARLOWE,To MiſsHOWE.
Wedneſday, March 1.YOU both nettled and alarmed me, my deareſt Miſs Howe, by the concluding part of your laſt. At firſt reading it, I did not think it neceſſary, ſaid I to myſelf, to guard againſt a critic, when I was writeing to ſo dear a friend. But then recollecting myſelf, Is there not more in it, ſaid I, than the reſult of a vein ſo naturally lively? Surely, I muſt have been guilty of an inadvertence.—Let me enter into the cloſe examination of myſelf, which my beloved friend adviſes. 

I did ſo; and cannot own any of theglow,any of thethrobsyou mention.—Upon my word,I will repeat, I cannot. And yet the paſſages in my letter upon which you are ſo humourouſly ſevere, lay me fairly open to your agreeable rail•ery. I own they do. And I cannot tell what turn my mind had taken, to dictate ſo oddly to my pen. 

But-pray-now—Is it ſaying ſo much, when one, who has no very particular regard toanyman, ſays, There areſomewho are preferable toothers?And is it blameable to ſay,Thoſeare the preferable, who are not well uſed by one's relations; yet diſpenſe with that uſage out of regard to one's ſelf, which they would otherwiſe reſent? Mr. Lovelace, for inſtance, I may be allow'd to ſay, is a man to be preferr'd to Mr. Solmes; and that Idoprefer him to that man: But, ſurely, this may be ſaid, without its being a neceſſary conſequence, that one muſt be in love with him. 

Indeed, I would not bein lovewith him, as it is called, for the world: Firſt, becauſe I have no opinion of his morals; and think it a fault in which our whole family, my brother excepted, has had a ſhare,that he was permitted to viſit us with a hope; which, however being diſtant, did not, as I have obſerved heretofore, intitle any of us to call him to account for ſuch of his immoralities as came to our ears. Next, becauſe I think him to be a vain man, capable of triumphing, ſecretly at leaſt, over a perſon whoſe heart he thinks he has engaged. And, thirdly, becauſe the aſſiduities and veneration which you impute to him, ſeem to carry an haughtineſs in them, as if his addreſs had a merit in it, that would be an equivalent for a lady's favour. In ſhort, he ſeems to me ſo to behave, when moſt unguarded, as if he thought himſelf above the very politeneſs which his birth and education (perhaps therefore more than his choice) oblige him to ſhew. In other words, his very politeneſs appears to me to be conſtrained; and, with the moſt remarkably eaſy and genteelperſon,ſomething ſeems to be behind in hismanner,that is too ſtudiouſly kept in. Then, good-humour'd as he is thought to be in the main toother peoplesſervants, and this even to familiarity (altho', as you have obſerv'd, a familiarity that has dignity in it, not unbecoming a man of quality), he is apt ſometimes to break out into paſſion withhis own:An oath or a curſe follows; and ſuch looks from thoſe ſervants as plainly ſhew terror; and that they ſhould have far'd worſe, had they not been in my hearing: With a confirmation in the maſter's looks of a ſurmize too well juſtify'd. 

Indeed, my dear, THIS man is not THE man. I have great objections to him. My heartthrobsnot after him: Iglownot, but with indignation againſt myſelf, for having given room for ſuch an imputation.—But you muſt not, my deareſt friend, conſtrue common Gratitude into Love. I cannot bear that you ſhould. But if ever I ſhould have the misfortune to think it Love, I promiſe you,upon my word,which is the ſame asupon my honour,that I will acquaint you with it. 

You bid me to tell you very ſpeedily, and by the new-found expedient, that I am not diſpleaſed with you for your agreeable raillery: I diſpatch this therefore immediately; poſtponing to my next the account of the inducements which my friends have to promote with ſo much earneſtneſs the addreſs of Mr. Solmes. 

Be ſatisfy'd, my dear, mean time, that I amnotdiſpleaſed with you: Indeed I am not: On the contrary, I give you my hearty thanks for your friendly premonitions. And I charge you, as I have often done, that if you obſerve any thing in me ſo very faulty, as would require, from you to others, in my behalf, the palliation of friendly and partial love, you acquaint me with it: For, methinks, I would•o conduct myſelf, as not to give reaſon even for anadverſaryto cenſure me: And how ſhall ſo weak and ſo young a creature avoid the cenſure of ſuch, if myfriendwill not hold a looking-glaſs before me, to let me ſee my imperfections? 

Judge me then, my dear, as any indifferent perſon knowing whatyouknow of me) would do:—I may,•t firſt, be a little pained; mayglowa little, perhaps,•o be found leſs worthy of your friendſhip, than I wiſh•o be; but aſſure yourſelf, that your kind correction will give me reflection, that ſhallamendme. If it do not, you will have a fault to accuſe me of, that will be utterlyin-excuſable: A fault, let me add, that ſhould younotaccuſe me of it, if in your opinion I am guilty, you will not be ſo much, ſowarmly,my friend, as I am yours; who have never ſpar'd you, you know, my dear, on the like occaſions. 

Here I break off; to begin another letter to you; with the aſſurance, mean time, that I am, and ever will be, 

Your equally affectionate and grateful CL. HARLOWE.LETTER XII. MiſsHOWE,To MiſsCLARISSA HARLOWE.
Thurſday Morn, March 2.INdeed you would not be in love with him for the world!—Your ſervant, my dear. Nor would I have you: For I think, with all the advantages of perſon, fortune, and family, he is not by any means worthy of you. And this opinion I give as well from the reaſons you mention, which I cannot but confirm, a•from what I have heard of him but a few hours ago from Mrs. Forteſcue, a favourite of lady Betty Lawrance, who knows him well.—But let me congratulate you, however, on your being the firſt of our ſe•that ever I heard of, who has been able to turn th•lion, Love, at her own pleaſure, into a lap-dog. 

Well but, if you have not the throbs and the glow•you have not: And are not in love; good reaſo•why—becauſe you would not be in love; and there'•no more to be ſaid.—Only, my dear, I ſhall keep good look-out upon you; and ſo I hope you wi•upon yourſelf: For it is no manner of argument, th•becauſe you would not be in love, you are not.—B•before I part intirely with this ſubject, a word in you•ear, my charming friend—'Tis only by way of caution, and in purſuance of the general obſervation, th•a ſtander-by is often a better judge of the game th•thoſe that play.—May it not be, that you have had and have, ſuch croſs creatures, and ſuch odd head to deal with, as have not allow'd you to attend t•the throbs?—Or, if you had them a little now an•then, whether, having had two accounts to pla•them to, you have not, by miſtake, put them to th•wrong one? 

But whether you have a value for this Lovelace,•not, I know you'll be impatient to hear what Mr•Forteſcue has ſaid of him. Nor will I keep you longer in ſuſpenſe. 

An hundred wild ſtories ſhe tells of him, from childhood to manhood: for, as ſhe obſerves, having never been ſubject to contradiction, he was always as miſchievous as a monkey. But I ſhall paſs over theſe whole hundred of his puerile rogueries, altho'indicativeones, as I may ſay, to take notice as well of ſome things you are not quite ignorant of, as of others you know not; and to make a few obſervations upon him and his ways. 

Mrs. Forteſcue owns, what every-body knows, that he is notoriouſly, nay, avowedly, a man of pleaſure; yet ſays, that in any thing he ſets his heart upon, or undertakes, he is the moſt induſtrious and perſevering mortal under the ſun. He reſts, it ſeems, not above ſix hours in the twenty-four, any more than you. He delights in writing. Whether at his Uncle's, or at Lady Betty's, or Lady Sarah's, he has always, when he retires, a pen in his fingers. One of his companions, confirming his love of writing, has told her, that his thoughts flow rapidly to his pen: And you and I, my dear, have obſerved, on more occaſions than one, that tho' he writes even a fine hand, he is one of the readieſt and quickeſt of writers. He muſt indeed have had early a very docile genius; ſince a perſon of his pleaſurable turn, and active ſpirit, could never have ſubmitted to take long or great pains in•ttaining the qualifications he is maſter of; qualifications ſo ſeldom attainable by youth of quality and fortune; by ſuch eſpecially of thoſe of either, who, like him, have never known what it was to be controuled. 

He had once the vanity, upon being complimented•n theſe talents (and on his ſurpriſing diligence for a man of pleaſure) to compare himſelf to Julius Cae•ar; who perform'd great actions by day, and wrote them down at night: And valued himſelf, that heonly wanted Caeſar's outſetting, to make a figure among his cotemporaries. 

He ſpoke this, indeed, ſhe ſays, with an air o•pleaſantry: For ſhe obſerved, and ſo have we, th•he has the art of acknowleging his vanity, with ſ•much humour, that it ſets him above the contemp•which is due to vanity and ſelf-opinion; and at the ſame time half-perſuades thoſe who he•r him, that h•really deſerves the exaltation he gives himſelf. 

But ſuppoſing it to be true, that all his vacan•nightly hours are imploy'd in writing, what can be hi•ſubjects? If, like Caeſar, his own actions, he muſt u•doubtedly be a very enterpriſing and very wicked man ſince no-body ſuſpects him to have a ſerious turn And, decent as he is in his converſation with us, hi•writings are not probably ſuch as will redound eithe•to his own honour, or to the benefit of others, we•they to be read. He muſt be conſcious of this, fin•Mrs. Forteſcue ſays, that, in the great correſpondence by letters which he holds, he is as ſecret a•careful, as if it were of a treaſonable nature;—y•troubles not his head with politics, tho' no bod•knows the intereſts of princes and courts better th•he. 

That you and I, my dear, ſhould love to write, no wonder. We have always, from the time eac•could hold a pen, delighted in epiſtolary correſpondencies. Our employments are domeſtic and ſede•tary; and we can ſcribble upon twenty innocent ſubjects, and take delight in them becauſe theyareinnocent; tho' were they to be ſeen, they might n•much profit or pleaſe others. But that ſuch a ga•lively young fellow as this, who rides, hunts, tr•vels, frequents the public entertainments, and h•meansto purſue his pleaſures, ſhould be able to ſet himſelf down to write for hours together, as you and have heard him ſay he frequently does, that is•ſtrange thing. 

Mrs. Forteſcue ſays, that he is a complete maſter of ſhort-hand writing. By the way, what inducements could ſuch a ſwift writer as he have, to learn ſhort-hand? 

She ſays (and we know it as well as ſhe) that he has a ſurpriſing memory; and a very lively imagination. 

Whatever his other vices are, all the world, as well as Mrs. Forteſcue, ſay, he is a ſober man. And among all his bad qualities,gaming,that great waſter of time, as well as fortune, is not his vice: So that he muſt have his head as cool, and his reaſon as clear, as the prime of youth, and his natural gaiety, will permit; and, by his early morning hours, a great portion of time upon his hands, to employ in writing, or worſe. 

Mrs. Forteſcue ſays, he has one gentleman, who is more his intimate and correſpondent than any of the reſt. You remember what his diſmiſs'd bailiff ſaid of him, and of his aſſociates. I don't find, but that man's character of him was in general pretty juſt. Mrs. Forteſcue confirms this part of it, that all his relations are afraid of him; and that his pride ſets him above owing obligations to them. She believes he is clear of the world; and that he will continue ſo: No doubt from the ſame motive that makes him avoid being oblig'd to his relations. 

A perſon willing to think favourably of him would hope, that abrave,alearned,and adiligentman, cannot benaturallyabadman.—But if he be better than his enemies ſay he is (and, if worſe, he is bad indeed), he is guilty of an inexcuſable fault, in being ſo careleſs as he is of his reputation. I think a man can be ſo but from one of theſe two reaſons: Either that he is conſcious he deſerves the evil ſpoken of him; or, that he takes a pride in being thought worſe than he is:—Both very bad and threatening indications: Since the firſt muſt ſhew him to be utterly abandon'd; and it is but natural to conclude from the other, that what a man is not aſham'd to have imputed to him, he willnot ſcruple to be guilty of, whenever he has opportunity. 

Upon the whole, and upon all that I could gather from Mrs. Forteſcue, Mr. Lovelace is a very faulty man: You and I have thought him too gay, too inconſiderate, too raſh, too little an hypocrite, to bedeep.You ſee he never would diſguiſe his natural temper (haughty as it certainly is), with reſpect to your brother's behaviour to him: Where he thinks a contempt due, he pays it to the uttermoſt: Nor has he complaiſance enough to ſpare your uncles. 

But were he deep, and ever ſo deep, you would ſoon penetrate him, if they would leave you to yourſelf. His vanity would be your clue. Never man had more: Yet, as Mrs. Forteſcue obſerved, never did man carry it off ſo happily. There is a ſtrange mixture in it of humourous vivacity:—For but one half of what he ſays of himſelf, when he is in the vein, any other man would be inſufferable. 

TALKof the devil,is an old ſaying.—The lively wretch has made me a viſit, and is but juſt gone away. He is all impatience and reſentment, at the treatment you meet with; and full of apprehenſions too, that they will carry their point with you. 

I told him my opinion, that you will never be brought to think of ſuch a man as Solmes; but that i•will probably end in a compoſition, never to have either. 

No man, he ſaid, whoſe fortunes and alliances are ſo conſiderable, ever had ſo little favour from a lady, for whoſe ſake he had borne ſo much. 

I told him my mind, as freely as I uſed to do. But who ever was in fault, Self being judge? He complain'd of ſpies ſet upon his conduct, and to pry into his life and morals; and this by your brother and uncles. 

I told him, that this was very hard upon him; and the more ſo, as neither the one nor the other, perhaps, would ſtand a fair inquiry. 

He ſmiled, and called himſelfmy ſervant.—The occaſion was too fair, he ſaid, for Miſs Howe, who never ſpared him, to let it paſs.—But, Lord help their ſhallow ſouls, would I believe it? they were for turning plotters uponhim.They had beſt take care he did not pay them in their own coin. Theirheartswere better turn'd for ſuch works, than theirheads. 

I aſked him, if he valued himſelf upon having a head better turn'd than theirs forſuch works,as he call'd them? 

He drew off: And then ran into the higheſt profeſſions of reverence and affection for you. The object ſo meritorious, who can doubt the reality of his profeſſions? 

Adieu, my deareſt, my noble friend!—I love and admire you for the generous concluſion of your laſt more than I can expreſs. Tho' I began this letter with impertinent raillery, knowing that you always loved to indulge my mad vein, yet never was there a heart that more glowed with friendly love, than that of 

Your own ANNA HOWE.LETTER XIII. MiſsCLARISSA HARLOWE,To MiſsHOWE.
Wedn. March 1.I NOW take up my pen, to lay before you the inducements and motives which my friends have to eſpouſe ſo earneſtly the addreſs of this Mr. Solmes. 

In order to ſet this matter in a clear light, it is neceſſary to go a little backward, and even perhaps to mention ſome things which you already know: And ſo you may look upon what I am going to relate,as a kind of ſupplement to my letters of the 15th and 20th of January laſt. 

In thoſe letters, of which I have kept memorandums, I gave you an account of my brother's and ſiſter's implacableneſs to Mr. Lovelace; and the methods they took (ſo far as they had then come to my knowlege) to ruin him in the opinion of my other friends: And I told you, that after a very cold, yet not a directly affrontive behaviour, to him, they all of aſuddenSee Letteriv.p.21.became more violent, and proceeded to perſonal inſults; which brought on, at laſt, the unhappy rencounter between my brother and him. 

Now you muſt know, that from the laſt converſation which paſſed between my aunt and me,•comes out, that thisſuddenvehemence on my brother's and ſiſter's parts, was owing to ſtronger reaſons than to the college-begun antipathy on his ſide, or t•ſlighted love on hers; to wit, to an apprehenſio•that my uncles intended to follow my grandfather'•example, in my favour; at leaſt, in a higher degree that they wiſh they ſhould: An apprehenſion founded, i•ſeems, on a converſation between my two uncles, an•my brother and ſiſter; which my aunt communicated to me in confidence, as an argument to prevail upon me to accept of Mr. Solmes'snobleſettlements; urging that ſuch a ſeaſonable compliance would fruſtrate my brother's and ſiſter's views, and eſtabliſh me for eve•in the opinion and love of my father and uncles. 

I will give you the ſubſtance of this communicate•converſation, after I have made a brief introductory obſervation or two: Which, however, I hardly need to make to you, who are ſo well acquainted with•all, did not the ſeries or thread of the ſtory require it. 

I have more than once mentioned to you the darling view ſome of us have long had ofraiſing a familyas it is called: A reflection, as I have often thought upon our own; which is no inconſiderable or upſta•one, on either ſide: Of my mamma's, eſpecially.—A view too frequently, it ſeems, entertained by families, which having great ſubſtance, cannot be ſatiſfy'd without rank and title. 

My uncles had once extended this view to each of us three children; urging, that as they themſelves intended not to marry, we each of us might be ſo portion'd, and ſo advantageouſly matched, as that our poſterity, if not ourſelves, might make a firſt figure in our country—While my brother, as the only ſon, thought the two girls might be very well provided for by ten or fifteen thouſand pounds apiece: And that all the real eſtates in the family, to wit, my grandfather's, father's, and two uncles, and the remainder of their reſpective perſonal eſtates, together with what he had an expectancy of from his godmother, would make ſuch a noble fortune, and give him ſuch an intereſt, as might intitle him to hope for a peerage: Nothing leſs would ſatisfy his ambition. 

With this view, he gave himſelf airs very early;'That his grandfather and uncles were his ſtewards: That no man ever had better: That daughters were but incumbrances and drawbacks upon a family:'Andthislow and familiar expreſſion was often in his mouth, and utter'd always with the ſelf-complaiſance which an imagin'd happy thought can be ſuppoſed to give the ſpeaker; to wit,'That a man who has ſons brings up chickens for his own table;'(tho' once I made his compariſon ſtagger with him, by aſking him, If the ſons, to make it hold, were to have their necks wrung off?); 'whereas daughters are chickens brought up for the tables of other men.' This, accompanied with the equally polite reflection,'That, to induce people to take them off their hands, the family-ſtock muſt be impaired into the bargain,'uſed to put my ſiſter out of all patience: And altho'•he now ſeems to think ayoungerſiſter only can be an incumbrance, ſhe was then often propoſing to meto make a party in our own favour againſt my brother'srapacious views,as ſhe uſed to call them: While I was for conſidering the liberties he took of this ſort, as the effect of a temporary pleaſantry; which in a young man not naturally good-humour'd, I was glad to ſee; or as a foible, that deſerv'd raillery, but no other notice. 

But when my grandfather's will (of the purport of which in my particular favour, until it was open'd, I was as ignorant as they) had lopp'd off one branch of my brother's expectation, he was extremely diſſatiſfy'd with me. No-body indeed was pleaſed: For altho' every-one loved me, yet being the youngeſt child, father, uncles, brother, ſiſter, all thought themſelves poſtpon'd, as to matter of right and power (Who loves not power?): And my father himſelf could not bear that I ſhould be made ſole, as I may call it, and independent; for ſuch the will, as to that eſtate, and the powers it gave (unaccountably, as they all ſaid), made me. 

To obviate therefore every-one's jealouſy, I gave up to my father's management, as you know, not only the eſtate, but the money bequeathed me (which was a moiety of what my grandfather had by him at his death; the other moiety being bequeathed to my ſiſter); contenting myſelf to take, as from his bounty, what he was pleaſed to allow me, without deſiring the leaſt addition to my annual ſtipend. And then I hoped I had laid all envy aſleep: But ſtill my brother and ſiſter (jealous, as now is evident, of my two uncles favour for me, and of the pleaſure I had given my father and them, by this act of duty) were every-now-and-then occaſionally doing me covert ill offices: Which I took the leſs notice of; having, as I imagin'd, removed the cauſe of their envy; and imputed every thing of that ſort to the petulance they are both pretty much noted for. 

My brother's acquiſition then took place: This made us all very happy; and he went down to take poſſeſſion of it: And his abſence (on ſo good an account too) made us ſtill happier.—Then follow'd Lord M.'s propoſal for my ſiſter: And this was an additional felicity for the time. I have told you how exceedingly good-humour'd it made my ſiſter. 

You know how that went off: You know what came on in its place. 

My brother then return'd; and we were all wrong again: And Bella, as I obſerv'd in my letters above-mention'd, had an opportunity to give herſelf the credit of having refuſed Mr. Lovelace, on the ſcore of his reputed faulty morals. This united my brother and ſiſter in one cauſe. They ſet themſelves on all occaſions to depreciate Mr. Lovelace, and hisfamilytoo, (a family which deſerves nothing but reſpect): And this gave riſe to the converſation I am leading to, between my uncles and them: Of which I now come to give the particulars; after I have obſerved, that it happen'd before the rencounter, and ſoon after the inquiry made into Mr. Lovelace's affairs had come out better than my brother and ſiſter hoped or expectedSee Letteriv.p.22.. 

They were bitterly inveighing againſt him, in their uſual way, ſtrengthening their invectives with ſome new ſtories in his disfavour; when my uncle Antony, having given them a patient hearing, declar'd,'That he thought the gentleman behav'd like a gentleman; his niece Clary with prudence; and that a more honourable alliance for the family,as he had often told them,could not be wiſhed for: Since Mr. Lovelace had a very good paternal eſtate; and that, by the evidence of an enemy, all clear: Nor did it appear, that he was ſo bad a man as had been repreſented: Wild indeed; but it was at a gay time of life: He was a man of ſenſe: And he was ſure that his niece would not have him, if ſhe had not good reaſon tothink him reform'd, or, by her own example, likely to be ſo.' 

He then gave one inſtance, my aunt told me, as a proof of a generoſity in his ſpirit, which ſhew'd him, he ſaid, to be no very bad man in nature; and of a temper, he was pleaſed to ſay, like my own: Which was, that when he, my uncle, had repreſented to him, that he might, if he pleaſed (as he had heard Lord M. ſay), make three or four hundred pounds a year of his paternal eſtate, more than he did; he anſwer'd,'That his tenants paid their rents well: That it was a maxim with his family, from which he would by no means depart, never to rack-rent old tenants, or their deſcendants; and that it was a pleaſure to him, to ſee all his tenants look fat, ſleek, and contented.' 

I indeed had once occaſionally heard him ſay ſomething like this; and thought he never looked ſo well as at the time;—except once; on this occaſion: 

An unhappy tenant came petitioning to my uncle Antony for forbearance, in Mr. Lovelace's preſence. When he had fruitleſly withdrawn, Mr. Lovelace pleaded his cauſe ſo well, that the man was called in again, and had his ſuit granted. And Mr. Lovelace privately follow'd him out, and gave him two guineas, for preſent relief; the man having declared, that, at the time, he had not five ſhillings in the world. 

On this occaſion, he told my uncle of the good action I hinted at, and that without any oſtentatious airs; to wit, That he had once obſerved an old tenant and his wife in a very mean habit at church; and queſtioning them about it next day, as he knew they had no hard bargain in their farm, the man ſaid, he had done ſome very fooliſh things with a good intention, which had put him behind-hand, and he could not have paid his rent, and appear better. He aſked him, how long it would take him to retrieve the fooliſh ſtep he had made. He ſaid, perhaps two or three years. Well then, ſaid he, I will abate you five poundsa year for ſeven years, provided you will lay it out upon your wife and ſelf, that you may make a Sunday appearancelikeMYtenants.Mean time take This (putting his hand in his pocket, and giving him five guineas), to put yourſelves in preſent plight; and let me ſee you next Sunday at church, hand in hand, like an honeſt and loving couple; and I beſpeak you to dine with me afterwards. 

Altho' this pleaſed me when I heard it, as giving an inſtance of generoſity and prudence at the ſame time, not leſſening, as my uncle took notice, the yearly value of the farm, yet, my dear, I had nothrobs,noglowsupon it;—upon my word,I had not. Nevertheleſs I own to you, that I could not help ſaying to myſelf on the occaſion,'Were it ever to be my lot to have this man, he would not hinder me from purſuing the methods I ſo much delight to take.'—With'A pity, that ſuch a man were notuniformlygood!' 

Forgive me this digreſſion. 

My uncle went on, my aunt told me,'That, beſides his paternal eſtate, he was the immediate heir to very ſplendid fortunes: That, when he was in treaty for his niece Arabella, Lord M. told him, what great things he and his two half-ſiſters intended to do for him, in order to qualify him for the title (which would be extinct at his Lordſhip's death); and which they hoped to procure for him, or a ſtill higher, that of thoſe Ladies father, which had been for ſome time extinct, on failure of heirs male: That this view made his relations ſo earneſt for his marrying: That as he ſaw not where Mr. Lovelace could better himſelf; ſo, truly, he thought there was wealth enough in their own family to build up three conſiderable ones: That therefore, he muſt needs ſay, he was the more deſirous of this alliance, as there was a great probability, not only from Mr. Lovelace's deſcent, but from his fortunes, that his nieceClariſſa might one day be a peereſs of Great Britain:—And upon that proſpect(here was the mortifying ſtroke)he ſhould, for his own part, think it not wrong, to make ſuch diſpoſitions as ſhould contribute to the better ſupport of the dignity.' 

My uncle Harlowe, it ſeems, far from diſapproving of what his brother had ſaid, declar'd,'That there was but one objection to an alliance with Mr. Lovelace; to wit, his morals: Eſpecially as ſo much could be done for Miſs Bella, and for my brother too, by my father; and as my brother was actually poſſeſſed of a conſiderable eſtate, by virtue of the deed of gift and will of his godmother Lovell.' 

Had I known this before, I ſhould the leſs have wonder'd at many things I have been unable to account for in my brother's and ſiſter's behaviour to me; and been more on my guard than I imagin'd there was a neceſſity to be. 

You may eaſily gueſs how much this converſation affected my brother at the time. He could not, you know, but be very uneaſy, to heartwo of his ſtewardstalk at this rate to his face. 

He had from early days, by his violent temper, made himſelf both feared and courted by the whole family. My father himſelf, as I have lately mentioned, very often (long before his acquiſitions had made him ſtill more aſſuming) gave way to him, as to an only ſon, who was to build up the name, and augment the honour of it. Little inducement therefore had he to correct a temper, which gave him ſo much conſideration with every-body. 

'See, ſiſter Bella,' ſaid he, in an indecent paſſion before my uncles, on the occaſion I have mention'd—'See how it is!—You and I ought to look about us!—This little Syren is in a fair way toout-uncle,as well asout-grandfatherus both!' 

From this time, as I now find it plain upon recollection, did my brother and ſiſter behave to me, as toone who ſtood in their way (ſometimes as to a creature in love with their common enemy); and to each other, as having but one intereſt: And were reſolved therefore to bend all their force to hinder an alliance from taking effect, which they believed was likely to oblige them to contract their views. 

And how was this to be done, after ſuch a declaration from both my uncles? 

My brother found out the way. My ſiſter, as I have ſaid, went hand in hand with him. Between them, the family union was broken, and every-one was made uneaſy. Mr. Lovelace was received more and more coldly by all: But not being to be put out of his courſe by ſlightsonly,perſonal affronts ſucceeded; defiances next; then the rencounter: That, as you have heard, did the buſineſs: And now, if I do not oblige them, my grandfather's eſtate is to be litigated with me; and I, who never deſigned to take advantage of the independency bequeathed me,am to be as dependent upon my papa's will, as a daughter ought to be who knows not what is good for herſelf.This is the language of the family now. 

But if I will ſuffer myſelf to be prevailed upon, how happy, astheylay it out, ſhall we all be!—Such preſents am I to have, ſuch jewels, and I cannot not tell what, from every one of the family! Then Mr. Solmes's fortunes are ſo great, and his propoſals ſo very advantageous (no relation whom he values), that there will be abundant room to raiſe mine upon them, were the high-intended favours of my own relations to be quite out of the queſtion. Moreover it is now, with this view, found out, that I have qualifications, which, ofthemſelves,will be a full equivalent to him for the ſettlements he is to make me; and leavehim,as well asthem,under an obligation to me for my compliance. He himſelf thinks ſo, I am told; ſo very poor a creature is he, even inhis own,as well as intheireyes. 

Theſe charming views anſwer'd, how rich, how ſplendid, ſhall we all three be! And I—what obligations ſhall I lay upon them all!—And that only by doing an act of duty ſo ſuitable to my character, and manner of thinking;—if indeed I am the generous, as well as dutiful creature, I have hitherto made them believe I am. 

This is the bright ſide that is turn'd to my father and uncles, to captivate them: But I am afraid, that my brother's and ſiſter's deſign is to ruin me with them at any rate. Were it otherwiſe, would they not, on my return from you, have rather ſought to court than frighten me into meaſures their hearts are ſo much bent to carry? A method they have followed ever ſince. 

Mean time, orders are given to all the ſervants to ſhew the higheſt reſpect to Mr. Solmes; thegenerousMr. Solmes is now his character with ſome of our family! But are not theſe orders a tacit confeſſion, that they think his own merit will not procure him reſpect? He is accordingly, in every viſit he makes, not only highly-careſſed by the principals of our family, but obſequiouſly attended and cring'd to by the menials.—Andthe noble ſettlementsare echoed from every mouth. 

Nobleis the word uſed to inforce the offers of a man, who is mean enough avowedly tohate,and wicked enough to propoſe torobof their juſt expectations, his own family (every one of which at the ſame time ſtands in too much need of his favour), in order to ſettle all he is worth upon me; and, if I die without children, and he has none by any other marriage,•pon a family which already abounds. Such are his propoſals. 

But were there no other motive to induce me to deſpiſe the upſtart man, is not this unjuſt one to his family enough?—Theupſtart man,I repeat; for he was not born to the immenſe riches he is poſſeſſed of:Riches left by one niggard to another, in injury to the next heir, becauſe that other is a niggard. And ſhould I not be as culpable, do you think, in my acceptance of ſuch unjuſt ſettlements, as he in the offer of them, if I could perſuade myſelf to be a ſharer in them, or ſuffer a reverſionary expectation of poſſeſſing them to influence my choice? 

Indeed it concerns me not a little, that my friends could be brought to encourage ſuch offers onſuchmotives as I think a perſon of conſcience ſhould not preſume to begin the world with. 

But this, it ſeems, is the only method that can be taken to diſappoint Mr. Lovelace; and at the ſame time to anſwer all my relations have to wiſh for each of us. AndſureI will not ſtand againſt ſuch an acceſſion to the family, as may happen from marrying Mr. Solmes: Since now apoſſibilityis diſcover'd (which ſuch a graſping mind as my brother's can eaſily turn into aprobability),that my grandfather's eſtate will revert to it, with a much more conſiderable one of the man's own. Inſtances of eſtates falling in, in caſes far more unlikely than this, are inſiſted on; and my ſiſter ſays, in the words of an old ſaw,It is good to be related to an eſtate. 

While Solmes, ſmiling no doubt to himſelf at a hope ſo remote, byoffersonly, obtains all their intereſts; and doubts not to join to his own the eſtate I am envied for; which, for the conveniency of its ſituation between two of his, will it ſeems be of twice the value to him that it would be of to any other perſon; and is therefore, I doubt not, a ſtronger motive with him than the wife. 

Theſe, my dear, ſeem to me the principal inducements of my relations to eſpouſe, ſo vehemently as they do, this man's ſuit. And here, once more, muſt I deplore the family-fault, which gives thoſe inducements ſuch a force, as it will be, difficult to reſiſt. 

And thus far, let matters with regard to Mr. Solmes and me come out as they will, my brother has ſucceeded in his views: that is to ſay, he has, in the firſt place, got my FATHER to make the cauſe his own, and to inſiſt upon my compliance as an act of duty. 

My MAMMA has never thought fit to oppoſe my father's will, when once he has declar'd himſelf determin'd. 

My UNCLES, ſtiff, unbroken, highly-proſperous bachelors, give me leave to ſay, tho' very worthy gentlemen in the main, have as high notions of a child's duty, as of a wife's obedience; in thelaſtof which, my mamma's meekneſs has confirm'd them, and given them greater reaſon to expect thefirſt. 

My aunt HERVEY (not extremely happy in her own nuptials, and perhaps under ſome little obligation) is got over, and chooſes not to open her lips in my favour, againſt the wills of a father and uncles ſo determin'd. 

This paſſiveneſs in her and in my mamma, in a point ſo contrary to their own firſt judgments, is too ſtrong a proof that my papa is abſolutely reſolv'd. 

Their tre•tment of my worthy Mrs. NORTON is a ſad confirmation of it: A woman deſerving of all conſideration for her wiſdom; and every-body thinking ſo; but who, not being wealthy enough to have due weight in a point againſt which ſhe has given her opinion, and which they ſeem bent upon carrying, is reſtrain'd from viſiting here, and even from correſponding with me, as I am this very day inform'd. 

Hatred to Lovelace, family aggrandizement, and this great motivepaternal authority!—What a forceunited!—when,ſingly,each conſideration is ſufficient to carry all before it! 

This is the formidable appearance which the addreſs of this diſagreeable man wears at preſent! 

My BROTHER and my SISTER triumph.—They have got me down,is their expreſſion, as Hannah, over-hearingthem, tells me. And ſo they have (yet I never knew that I was inſolentlyup); for now my brother will either lay me under an obligation to comply, to my own unhappineſs, and ſo make me an inſtrument of his revenge upon Lovelace; or, if I refuſe, throw me into diſgrace with my whole family. 

Who will wonder at the intrigues and plots carried on by undermining courtiers againſt one another, when a private family, but three of which can poſſibly have claſhing intereſts, and one of them, as ſhe preſumes to think, above ſuch low motives, cannot be free from them? 

What at preſent moſt concerns me, is, the peace of my mamma's mind! How can the huſband ofſucha wife (agoodman too!—But oh! this prerogative of manhood!) be ſopoſi-tive, ſo unper-ſuade-able, to one who has brought into the family, means, which they know ſo well the value of, that methinks they ſhould valueherthe more fortheirſake! 

They do indeed value her: But, I am ſorry to ſay, ſhe has purchaſed that value by her compliances: Yet has merit for which ſhe ought to be venerated; prudence which ought of itſelf to be truſted and conformed to in every-thing. 

But whither roves my pen? How dare a perverſe girl take theſe liberties with relations ſo very reſpectable, and whom ſhe highly reſpects?—What an unhappy ſituation is that which obliges her, in herown defenceas it were, to expoſetheirfailings? 

But you, who know how much I love and reverence my mamma, will judge what a difficulty I am under, to be obliged to oppoſe a ſcheme which ſhe has engaged in. Yet Imuſtoppoſe it (to comply is impoſſible), and muſt declare without delay my oppoſition, or my difficulties will increaſe; ſince, as I am juſt now inform'd, a lawyer has been this very day conſulted (would you have believ'd it?) in relation to ſettlements. 

Were ours a Roman-Catholic family, how much happier for me, that they thought a Nunnery would anſwer all their views!—How happy, had not a certain perſon ſlighted ſomebody! All then would have been probably concluded on between them before my brother had arrived to thwart the match: Then had I had a ſiſter; which now I have not; and two brothers;—both aſpiring; poſſibly both titled: While I ſhould only have valued that in either which is above title, that which is truly noble in both! 

But what long-reaching ſelfiſhneſs is my brother govern'd by! By what remote, exceedingly remote views!—Views, which it is in the power of the ſlighteſt accident, of a fever, for inſtance (the ſeeds of which are always vegetating, as I may ſay, and ready to burſt forth, in his own impetuous temper), or of the provoked weapon of an adverſary, to blow up, and deſtroy! 

I will break off here. Let me write ever ſo freely of my friends, I am ſure ofyourkind conſtruction: And I confide in your diſcretion, that you will avoid reading to or tranſcribing for others, ſuch paſſages as may have the appearance of treating too freely the parental, or even the fraternal character, or induce others to cenſure for a ſuppoſed failure in duty to the one, or decency to the other, 

Your truly affectionate CL. HARLOWE.LETTER XIV. MiſsCLARISSA HARLOWE,To MiſsHOWE.
Thurſday Evening, March 2.ON Hannah's depoſiting my long letter, begun yeſterday, but by reaſon of ſeveral interruptions, not finiſh'd till within this hour, ſhe found and brought me yours of this day. I thank you, my dear, for thiskind expedition:—Theſe few lines will perhaps be time enough depoſited, to be taken away by your ſervant with the others: Yet they are only to thank you, and to tell you my increaſing apprehenſions. 

I muſt beg or ſeek the occaſion to apply to my mamma for her mediation;—for I am in danger of having a day fixed, and antipathy taken for baſhfulneſs.—Should not ſiſters be ſiſters to each other? Should they not make a common cauſe of it, as I may ſay, a cauſe of ſex, on ſuch occaſions as the preſent? Yet mine, in ſupport of my brother's ſelfiſhneſs, and, no doubt, in concert with him, has been urging in full aſſembly, as I am told, and that with an earneſtneſs peculiar to herſelf when ſhe ſets upon any thing, that an abſolute day be given me; and if I comply not, to be told, that it ſhall be to the forfeiture of all my fortunes, and of all their loves. 

She need not be ſo officious: My brother's intereſt, without hers, is ſtrong enough; for he has found means to confederate all the family againſt me. Upon ſome freſh provocation, or new intelligence concerning Mr. Lovelace (I know not what it is), they have bound themſelves, or are to bind themſelves, by a ſign'd paper, to one another (the Lord bleſs me, my dear, what ſhall I do!), to carry this point of Mr. Solmes, in ſupport of my father's authority, as it is called, and againſt Lovelace, as a libertine, and an enemy to the family: And if ſo, I am ſure, I may ſay againſtme.—How impolitic in them all, to join two people in one intereſt, whom they wiſh for ever to keep aſunder! 

What the diſcharg'd ſteward reported of him was bad enough: What Mrs. Forteſcue ſaid, not only confirms that bad, but gives room to think him ſtill worſe:—And ſomething my friends have come at, which, as Betty Barnes tells Hannah, is of ſo heinous a nature, that it proves him to be the worſt of men.—But, hang the man, I had almoſt ſaid,—what is he to me?Whatwouldhe be—were not this Mr. Sol—O, my dear, how I hate that man in the light he is propoſed to me!—All of them at the ſame time afraid of Mr. Lovelace;—yet not afraid to provoke him!—How am I intangled!—to be obliged to go on correſponding with him fortheirſakes—Heaven forbid, that their perſiſted-in violence ſhould ſo drive me, as to make it neceſſary formy own!—But ſurelytheywill yield—IndeedIcannot.—I believe the gentleſt ſpirits when provoked (cauſleſly and cruelly provoked) are the moſt determin'd.—The reaſon may be, That not taking up reſolutions lightly, their very deliberation makes them the more immoveable.—And then, when a point is clear and ſelf-evident to everybody, one cannot, without impatience, think of entering into an argument or contention upon it. 

An interruption obliges me to conclude myſelf, in ſome hurry, as well as fright, what I muſt ever be, 

Yours more than my own, CLARISSA HARLOWE.LETTER XV. MiſsHOWE,To MiſsCLARISSA HARLOWE.
Friday, March 3.I HAVE both your letters at once. It is very unhappy, my dear, ſince your friends will have you marry, that ſuch a merit as yours ſhould be addreſſed by a ſucceſſion of worthleſs creatures, who have nothing but their preſumption for their excuſe. 

That theſe preſumers appear not in this very unworthy light to ſome of your friends, is, becauſe their defects are not ſo ſtriking to them, as to others.—And why? Shall I venture to tell you?—Becauſe they are nearer their own ſtandard.—Modeſty,after all, perhaps has a concern in it; for how ſhould they think,that anieceor aſiſteroftheirs(I will not go higher, for fear of incurring your diſpleaſure) ſhould be an angel?—But where indeed is the man to be found, who has the leaſt ſhare of due diffidence, that dares to look up to Miſs Clariſſa Harlowe with hope, or with any thing but wiſhes? Thus the bold and forward, not being ſenſible of their defects, aſpire; while the modeſty of the really worthy fills them with too much reverence to permit them to explain themſelves. Hence your Symmes's, your Byron's, your Mullins's, your Wyerley's (the beſt of the herd), and your Solmes's, in turn invade you—Wretches that, looking upon the reſt of your family, need not deſpair of ſucceeding in an alliance with it:—But, to you, what an inexcuſable pr•ſumption! 

Yet I am afraid all oppoſition will be in vain. You muſt, you will, I doubt, be ſacrificed to this odious man!—I know your family!—There will be no reſiſting ſuch baits as he has thrown out.—O, my dear, my beloved friend! and are ſuch charming qualities, is ſuch exalted merit, to be ſunk in ſuch a marriage!—You muſt not, your uncle tells my mamma, diſpute their authority. AUTHORITY! what a full word is that in the mouth of a narrow-minded perſon, who happen'd to be born thirty years before one!—Of your uncles I ſpeak; for as to theparentalauthority, That ought to be ſacred.—But ſhould not parents havereaſonfor what they do? 

Wonder not, however, at your Bell's unſiſterly behaviour in this affair: I have a particular to add to the inducements your inſolent brother is govern'd by, which will account for all her driving. Heroutward eye,asyouhave own'd, was fromthe firſtſtruck with the figure and addreſs of the man whom ſhe pretends to deſpiſe, and who 'tis certain thoroughly deſpiſes her: But you have not told us, thatſtillſhe loves him of all men. Bell has a meanneſs in her very pride; and no one is ſo proud as Bell. She has own'dher love, her uneaſy days, and ſleepleſs nights, and her revenge grafted upon it, to her favourite Betty Barnes.—To lay herſelf in the power of a ſervant's tongue!—Poor creature!—But LIKE little ſouls will find one another out, and mingle, as well as LIKE great ones. This, however, ſhe told the wench in ſtrict confidence: And thus, by way of thefemale round-about,as Lovelace had the ſaucineſs on ſuch another occaſion, in ridicule of our ſex, to call it, Betty (pleaſed to be thought worthy of a ſecret, and to have an opportunity of inveighing againſt Lovelace's perfidy, as ſhe would have it to be) told it to one ofherconfidants: That confidant, with like injunctions of ſecrecy, to Miſs Lloyd's Harriot—Harriot to Miſs Lloyd—Miſs Lloyd tome—I to you—with leave to make what you pleaſe of it.—And now you will not wonder to find in Miſs Bell an implacable rivaleſs, rather than an affectionate ſiſter; and will be able to account for the wordswitchcraft, ſyren,and ſuch-like, thrown out againſt you; and for her driving on for a fixed day for ſacrificing you to Solmes: In ſhort, for her rudeneſs and violence of every kind.—What a ſweet revenge will ſhe take, as well upon Lovelace, as upon you, if ſhe can procure her rival and all-excelling ſiſter to be married to the man that ſiſter hates; and ſo prevent her having the man whom ſhe herſelf loves (whetherſhehave hope of him, or not), and whom ſhe ſuſpects her ſiſter loves! Poiſons and poniards have often been ſet to work by minds inflam'd by diſappointed love and revenge; will you wonder then, that the ties of relationſhip in ſuch a caſe have no force, and that a ſiſter forgets to be a ſiſter? 

This her ſecret motive (the more reſiſtleſs, becauſe her pride is concern'd to make her diſavow it), join'd with her former envy, and with the general and avowed inducements particularized by you, now it is known, fills me with apprehenſions for you: Join'dalſo by a brother, who has ſuch an aſcendant over the whole family; and whoſeintereſt,ſlave to it as he always was, and whoſerevenge,his other darling paſſion, are engaged to ruin you with everyone: Both having the ears of all your family, and continually miſrepreſenting all you ſay, all you do, to them: Their ſubject the rencounter, and Lovelace's want of morals, to expatiate upon.—O, my dear! how will you be able to withſtand all this?—I am ſure (—alas! I amtooſure) that they will ſubdue ſuch a fine ſpirit as yours, unuſed to oppoſition; and,Tell it not in Gath,youmuſtbe Mrs. Solmes! 

Mean time, it is now eaſy, as you will obſerve, to gueſs from what quarter the report I mention'd to you in one of my former came, That the younger ſiſter has robb'd the elder of her lover: For Betty whiſper'd it, at the time ſhe whiſper'd the reſt, that neither Lovelace nor you had done honourably byheryoung miſtreſs.—How cruel, my dear, in you, to•ob the poor Bella of the only lover ſhe ever had!—At the inſtant too that ſhe was priding herſelf, that•ow, at laſt, ſhe ſhould have it in her power not only•o gratify her own ſuſceptibilities, but to give an ex•mple to theflirtsof her ſex (my worſhip's ſelf the•rincipal, I ſuppoſe, with her) how to govern their man with a ſilken rein, and without a kerb-bridle! 

Upon the whole, I have now no doubt of their•erſevering in favour of the deſpicable Solmes; and of•heir dependence upon the gentleneſs of your temper,•nd the regard you have for their favour, and for your•wn reputation. And now I am more than ever con•inced of the propriety of the advice I formerly gave•ou, to keep in your own hands the eſtate bequeathed•o you by your grandfather.—Had you done ſo, it•ould have procured you at leaſt anoutwardreſpect•om your brother and ſiſter; which would have made•em conceal the envy and ill-will that now is burſting•oon you from hearts ſo narrow. 

I muſt harp a little more upon this ſtring—Don't you obſerve, how much your brother's influence has over-topp'd yours, ſince he has got into fortunes ſo conſiderable; and ſince you have given ſome of them an appetite tocontinuein themſelves the poſſeſſion of your eſtate, unleſs you comply with their terms? 

I know your dutiful, your laudable motives; and one would have thought, that you might have truſted to a father who ſo dearly loved you. But had you been actually in poſſeſſion of that eſtate, and living up to it, and upon it (your youth protected from blighting tongues by the company of your prudent Norton, as you had purpoſed), do you think that your brother, grudging it to you at the time, as he did, and looking upon it as his right, as an only ſon, would have been practiſing about it, and aiming at it?—I told you ſome time ago, that I thought your trials but proportion'd to your prudence:—But you will be more than woman, if you can extricate yourſelf with honour, having ſuch violent ſpirits and ſordid minds, as in ſome, and ſuch tyrannical and deſpot•wills, as in others, to deal with.—Indeed, allmaybe done, and the world be taught further to admire you, for your blind duty and will-leſs reſignation, if yo•can perſuade yourſelf to be Mrs. Solmes! 

I am pleaſed with the inſtances you give me of Mr. Lovelace's benevolence to his own tenants, and with his little gift to your uncle's. Mrs. Forteſcueallowshim to be the beſt of landlords: I might have told yo•That, had I thought it neceſſary to put you in ſome little conceit of him. He has qualities, in ſhort, that may make him a tolerable creature on the other ſide•fifty: But God help the poor woman to whoſe lot he ſhall fall till then!Women,I ſhould ſay perhaps; ſince he may break half a dozen hearts before that time.—But to the point I was upon—Shall we not have reaſon to commend the tenant's grateful honeſty, if we a•told, that with joy the poor man call'd out your uncl•and on the ſpot paid him in part of his debt thoſe two•uineas?—But what ſhall we ſay of that landlord, who, tho' he knew the poor man to be quite deſtitute,•ould take it; and, ſaying nothing while Mr. Love•ce ſtaid, as ſoon as he was gone, tell of it, praiſing•he poor fellow's honeſty?—Were this ſo, and were•ot that landlord related to my deareſt friend, how•ould I deſpiſe ſuch a wretch!—But perhaps the•ory is aggravated. Covetous people have every•ne's ill word: And ſo indeed they ought; becauſe•hey are only ſollicitous to keep that which they pre•er to every-one's good one.—Covetous indeed would they be, who deſervedneither,yet expectedboth! 

I long for your next letter. Continue to be as par•cular as poſſible. I can think of no other ſubject but•hat relates to you, and to your affairs: For I am, and ever will be, moſt affectionately, 

All your own ANNA HOWE.LETTER XVI. MiſsCLARISSA HARLOWE,To MiſsHOWE.(Her laſt, not at the time received.)
Friday, March 3.O MY dear friend, I have had a ſad conflict! trial upon trial; conference upon conference!—But that law, what ceremony, can give a man a right to heart which abhors him more than it does any of God Almighty's creatures? 

I hope my mamma will be able to prevail for me.—•ut I will recount all, tho' I ſit up the whole night•do it; for I have a vaſt deal to write; and will be minute as you wiſh me to be. 

In my laſt, I told you, in a fright, my apprehen•ons; which were grounded upon a converſation thatpaſſed between my mamma and my aunt, part•which Hannah overheard. I need not give you th•further particulars; ſince what I have to relate to yo•from different converſations that have paſſed between my mamma and me in the ſpace of a very few hour•will include them all. I will begin then. 

I went down this morning, when breakfaſt w•ready, with a very uneaſy heart, from what Hanna•had told me yeſterday afternoon; wiſhing for an opportunity, however, to appeal to my mamma, in hopes•engage her intereſt in my behalf, and purpoſing•try to find one, when ſhe retired to her own apartment after breakfaſt:—But, unluckily, there was th•odious Solmes ſitting aſquat between my mamma an•ſiſter, withſo muchaſſurance in his looks!—But yo•k•ow, my dear, that thoſe we love not, cannot•any-thing to pleaſe us. 

Had the wretch kept his ſeat, it might have bee•well enough: But the bent and broad-ſhoulder'd creature muſt needs riſe, and ſtalk towards a chair, whi•was juſt by that which was ſet for me. 

I removed it at a diſtance, as if to make way•my own: And down I ſat, abruptly I believe; wha•I had heard, all in my head. 

But this was not enough to daunt him: The m•is a very confident, he is a very bold, ſtaring man!—Indeed, my dear, the man is very confident. 

He took the removed chair, and drew it ſo ne•mine, ſquatting in it with his ugly weight, that•preſs'd upon my hoop.—I was ſo offended (all I h•heard, as I ſaid, in my head), that I removed to a•other chair. I own I had too little command of m•ſelf: It gave my brother and ſiſter too much adva•tage; I dare ſay they took it:—But I did it involu•tarily, I think: I could not help it.—I knew n•what I did. 

I ſaw my papa was exceſſively diſpleaſed. Wh•angry, no man's countenance ever ſhew'd it ſo mu•〈◊〉my papa's. Clariſſa Harlowe! ſaid he, with a big•oice; and there he ſtopp'd.—Sir! ſaid I, and courte•'d.—I trembled; and put my chair nearer the•retch, and ſat down; my face I could feel all in a•ow. 

Make tea, child, ſaid my kind mamma: Sit by•e, love; and make tea. 

I removed with pleaſure to the ſeat the man had•itted; and being thus indulgently put into employ•ent, ſoon recover'd myſelf; and in the courſe of•e breakfaſting officiouſly aſked two or three que•tions of Mr. Solmes, which I would not have done,•ut to make up with my papa.—Proud ſpirits may•e brought to; whiſperingly ſpoke my ſiſter to me,•ver her ſhoulder, with an air of triumph and ſcorn:•ut I did not mind her. 

My mamma was all kindneſs and condeſcenſion.•aſked her once, if ſhe were pleaſed with the tea?•he ſaid, ſoftly, and again called medear,ſhe was•leaſed with all I did. I was very proud of this en•ouraging goodneſs: And all blew over, as I hoped;•etween my papa and me; for he alſo ſpoke kindly•o me two or three times. 

Small incidents theſe, my dear, to trouble you with; only as they lead to greater; as you ſhall hear. 

Before the uſual breakfaſt-time was over, my papa withdrew with my mamma, telling her he wanted to•eak to her. My ſiſter, and my aunt, who was with•s, next dropt away. 

My brother gave himſelf ſome airs of inſult, that•underſtood well enough; but which Mr. Solmes•ould make nothing of:—And at laſt he aroſe from is ſeat—Siſter, ſaid he, I have a curioſity to ſhew•ou: I will fetch it: And away he went; ſhutting•he door cloſe after him. 

I ſaw what all this was for. I aroſe; the man hem•ing up for a ſpeech, riſing, and beginning to ſet is ſplay-feet (indeed, my dear, the man in all hisways is hateful to me) in an approaching poſture.—I will ſave my brother the trouble of bringing to me his curioſity, ſaid I.—I courteſy'd—Your ſervant, Sir—The man cry'd, Madam, Madam, twice, and look'd like a fool.—But away I went—to find my brother, to ſave my word.—But my brother was gone, indifferent as the weather was, to walk in the garden with my ſiſter. A plain caſe, that he had left his curioſity with me, and deſign'd to ſhew me no other. 

I had but juſt got into my own apartment, and began to think of ſending Hannah to beg an audience of my mamma (the more encouraged by her condeſcending goodneſs at breakfaſt), when Shorey, her woman, brought me her commands to attend her in her cloſet. 

My papa, Hannah told me, had juſt gone out of it with a poſitive, angry countenance. Then I as much dreaded the audience, as I had wiſhed for it before. 

I went down, however; but, apprehending the ſubject, approached her trembling, and my heart in viſible palpitations. 

She ſaw my concern. Holding out her kind arms, as ſhe ſat, Come kiſs me, my dear, ſaid ſhe, with a ſmile like a ſun-beam breaking thro' the cloud that overſhadowed her naturally benign aſpect. Why flutters my jewel ſo? 

This preparative ſweetneſs, with her goodneſs juſt before, confirmed my apprehenſions. My mamma ſaw the bitter pill wanted gilding. 

O my mamma! was all I could ſay; and I claſp'd my arms round her neck, and my face ſunk into her boſom. 

My child! my child! reſtrain, ſaid ſhe, your powers of moving!—I dare not elſe truſt myſelf with you.—And my tears trickled down her boſom, as hers bedew'd my neck. 

O the words of kindneſs, all to be expreſs'd in vain, that flow'd from her lips! 

Lift up your ſweet face, my beſt child, my own Clariſſa Harlowe!—O my daughter, beſt-beloved of my heart, lift up a face ſo ever-amiable to me!—Why theſe ſobs?—Is an apprehended duty ſo affecting a thing, that before I can ſpeak—But I am glad, my love, you can gueſs at what I have to ſay to you. I am ſpared the pains of breaking to you what was a taſk upon me reluctantly enough undertaken to break to you. 

Then riſing, ſhe drew a chair near her own, and made me ſit down by her, overwhelm'd as I was with tears of apprehenſion of what ſhe had to ſay, and of gratitude for her truly maternal goodneſs to me; ſobs ſtill my only language. 

And drawing her chair ſtill nearer to mine, ſhe put her arms round my neck, and my glowing cheek, wet with my tears, cloſe to her own: Let me talk to you, my child; ſince ſilence is your choice, hearken to me, andbeſilent. 

You know, my dear, what I every day forego, and undergo, for the ſake of peace: Your papa is a very good man, and means well; but he will not be controuled; nor yet perſuaded. You have ſeem'd to pitymeſometimes, that I am obliged to give up every point. Poor man!hisreputation the leſs for it;minethe greater; yet would I not have this credit, if I could help it, at ſo dear a rate tohimand tomyſelf.You are a dutiful, a prudent, and awiſechild, ſhe was pleaſed to ſay (in hope, no doubt, to make me ſo): You would not add, I am ſure, to my trouble: You would not wilfully break that peace which coſts your mamma ſo much to preſerve. Obedience is better than ſacrifice. O my Clary Harlowe, rejoice my heart, by telling me I have apprehended too much!—I ſee your concern! I ſee your perplexity! I ſee your conflict (looſing her arm, andriſing, not willing I ſhould ſee how much ſhe herſelf was affected). I will leave you a moment.—Anſwer me not (for I was eſſaying to ſpeak, and had, as ſoon as ſhe took her dear cheek from mine, dropt down on my knees, my hands claſped and lifted up in a ſupplicating manner): I am not prepared for your irreſiſtible expoſtulation, ſhe was pleaſed to ſay.—I will leave you to recollection: And I charge you, on my bleſſing, that all this my truly maternal tenderneſs be not thrown away upon you. 

And then ſhe withdrew into the next apartment; wiping her eyes, as ſhe went from me; as mine overflow'd; my heart taking in the whole compaſs of her meaning. 

She ſoon returned, having recover'd more ſteadineſs. 

Still on my knees, I had thrown my face croſs the chair ſhe had ſat in. 

Look up to me, my Clary Harlowe. No ſullenneſs, I hope! 

No, indeed, my ever-to be-revered mamma.—And I aroſe.—I bent my knee. 

She raiſed me, No kneeling to me, but with knees of duty and compliance.—Your heart, not your knees, muſt bend.—It is abſolutely determin'd.—Prepare yourſelf therefore to receive yourpapa,when he viſits you by-and-by, as he would wiſh to receiveyou:But on this one quarter of an hour depends the peace of my future life, the ſatisfaction of all the family, and your own ſecurity from a man of violence: And I charge youbeſides,on my bleſſing, that you think of being Mrs. Solmes. 

There went the dagger to my heart, and down I ſunk; and when I recover'd, found myſelf in the arms of my Hannah, my ſiſter's Betty holding open my reluctantly open'd palm, my laces cut, my linen ſcented with harts-horn; and my mamma gone.—Had I beenleſskindly treated, the hated name ſtillforborn to be mention'd, or mention'd with a little more preparation and reſerve, I had ſtood the horrid ſound with leſs viſible emotion—But to be bid, on the bleſſing of a mother ſo dearly beloved, ſo truly reverenc'd, to think of being Mrs. SOLMES, what a denunciation was that! 

Shorey came in with a meſſage, deliver'd in her ſolemn way: Your mamma, Miſs, is concern'd for your diſorder: She expects you down again in an hour; and bid me ſay, that ſhe then hopes every thing from your duty. 

I made no reply; for what could I ſay? And leaning upon my Hannah's arm, withdrew to my own apartment. There you will gueſs how the greateſt part of the hour was employed. 

Within that time, my mamma came up tome. 

I love, ſhe was pleaſed to ſay, to come intothisapartment!—No emotions, child! No flutters!—Am I not your mother!—Am I not your fond, your indulgent mother! Do not diſcompoſemeby diſcompoſingyourſelf!—Do not occaſionmeuneaſineſs, when I would giveyounothing but pleaſure. Come, my dear, we will go into your library! 

She took my hand, led the way, and made me ſit down by her: And after ſhe had inquired how I did, ſhe began in a ſtrain, as if ſhe had ſuppoſed I had made uſe of the intervening ſpace, to overcome all my objections. 

She was pleaſed to tell me, that my papa and ſhe, in order to ſpare my natural modeſty, had taken the whole affair upon themſelves— 

Hear me out, and then ſpeak (for I was going to expoſtulate). You are no ſtranger to the end of Mr. Solmes's viſits.— 

O Madam— 

Hear me out; and then ſpeak. He is not indeed every thing I wiſh him to be: But he is a man of probity, and has no vices— 

No vices, Madam!— 

Hear me out, child—You have not behaved much amiſs to him: We have ſeen with pleaſure that you have not.— 

O Madam, muſt I not now ſpeak!— 

I ſhall have done preſently—A young creature of your virtuous andpiousturn, ſhe was pleaſed to ſay, cannot ſurely love a profligate: You love your brother too well, to wiſh to marry one who had like to have killed him, and who threaten'd your uncles, and defies us all. You have had your own way ſix or ſeven times: We want to ſecure you againſt a man ſo vile. Tell me; I have a right to know; whether you prefer this man to all others?—Yet God forbid, that I ſhould know you do! for ſuch a declaration would make us all miſerable. Yet, tell me, are your affections engag'd to this man? 

I knew what the inference would be, if I had ſaid they were not. 

You heſitate: You anſwer me not: You cannot anſwer me.—Riſing—Never more will I look upon you with an eye of favour.— 

O Madam, Madam! Kill me not with your diſpleaſure: I would not, Ineednot, heſitate one moment, did I not dread the inference, if I anſwer you as you wiſh.—Yet be that inference what it will, your threatened diſpleaſure, will make me ſpeak. And I declare to you, that I know not my own heart, if it be not abſolutely free. And pray, let me aſk, my deareſt mamma, in what has my conduct been faulty, that, like a giddy creature, I muſt be forced to marry, to ſave me from—From what? Let me beſeech you, Madam, to be the guardian of my reputation.—Let not your Clariſſa be precipitated into a ſtate ſhe wiſhes not to enter into with any man! And this upon a ſuppoſition that otherwiſe ſhe ſhall marry herſelf, and diſgrace her whole family. 

Well then, Clary (paſſing over the force of my plea), if your heart be free— 

O my beloved mamma, let the uſual generoſity of your dear heart operate in my favour. Urge not upon me the inference that made me heſitate. 

I won't be interrupted, Clary.—You have ſeen in my behaviour to you, on this occaſion, a truly maternal tenderneſs; you have obſerv'd that I have undertaken this taſk, with ſome reluctance, becauſe the man is not every thing; and becauſe I know you carry your notions of perfection in a man too high— 

Deareſt Madam, this one time excuſe me!—Is therethenany danger that I ſhould be guilty of an imprudent thing for the man's ſake you hint at? 

Again interrupted!—Am I to be queſtion'd, and argued with? You know this won't do ſomewhere elſe. You know it won't. What reaſon then, ungenerous girl, can you have for arguing with me thus, but becauſe you think from my indulgence to you, you may? 

What•anI ſay? WhatcanI do? What muſt that cauſe be, that will not bear being argued upon? 

Again! Clary Harlowe!— 

Deareſt Madam, forgive me: It was always my pride and my pleaſure to obey you. But look upon that man—ſee but the diſagreeableneſs of his perſon— 

Now, Clary, do I ſee whoſe perſon you have in your eye!—Now is Mr. Solmes, I ſee, butcomparativelydiſagreeable; diſagreeable only as another man has a much more ſpecious perſon. 

But, Madam, are not his manners equally ſo?—Is not his perſon the true repreſentative of his mind?—That other man is not, ſhall not, be any thing to me, releaſe me but from this one man, whom my heart, unbidden, reſiſts. 

Condition thus with your papa. Willhebear, do you think to be thus dialogu'd with? Have I not conjur'd you, as you value my peace—What is it thatIdo not give up?—This very taſk, becauſe I apprehended you would not beeaſilyperſuaded, is ataſkindeedupon me. And willyougive up nothing? Have you not refuſed as many as have been offer'd to you? If you would not have us gueſs for whom, comply; for comply you muſt, or be look'd upon as in a ſtate of defiance with your whole family. 

And ſaying this, ſhe aroſe, and went from me. But at the chamber-door ſtopt, and turn'd back; I will not ſay below, in what a diſpoſition I leave you. Conſider of every thing. The matter is reſolv'd upon. As you value your father's bleſſing and mine, and the ſatisfaction of all the family, reſolve to comply. I will leave you for a few moments. I will come up to you again: See that I find you as I wiſh to find you; and ſinceyour heart is free,let your duty govern it. 

In about half an hour, my mamma return'd: She found me in tears. She took my hand; It is my part evermore to be of the acknowleging ſide. I believe I have needleſly expoſed myſelf to your oppoſition, by the method I have taken with you. I firſt began as if I expected a denial, and by my indulgence brought it upon myſelf. 

Do not, my deareſt mamma! do not, ſay ſo! 

Were the occaſion for this debate, proceeded ſhe, to have riſen from myſelf; were it in my power to diſpenſe with your compliance; you too well know what you can do with me— 

Would any-body, my dear Miſs Howe, wiſh to marry, when one ſees a neceſſity for ſuch a ſweet temper as my mamma's, either to be ruin'd, or depriv'd of all power? 

—When I came to you a ſecond time, knowing that your contradiction would avail you nothing, I refuſed to hear your reaſons: And in This I was wrong too, becauſe a young creature, who loves to reaſon, anduſedto love to be convinc'd by reaſon, ought to have all her objections heard: I now, therefore, this third time, ſee you; and am come reſolv'dto hear all you have to ſay: And let me, my dear, by my patience engage your gratitude; yourgeneroſity,I will call it; becauſe it is to You I ſpeak, who uſed to have a mind wholly generous: Let me, if your heartbe really free,let me ſee what it will induce you to do to oblige me: And ſo as you permit your uſual diſcretion to govern you, I will hear all you have to ſay; but with this intimation, that ſay what you will, it will be of no avail elſewhere. 

What a dreadful ſaying is that! But could I engage your pity, Madam, it would be ſomewhat. 

You have as much of my pity, as of my love. But what isperſon,Clary, with one of your prudence, andyour heart diſengag'd?— 

Should the eye be diſguſted, when the heart is to be engag'd?—O Madam, who can think of marrying, when the heart muſt be ſhock'd at the firſt appearance, and where the diſguſt muſt be confirm'd by every converſation afterwards? 

This, Clary, is owing to your prepoſſeſſion. Let me not have cauſe to regret that noble firmneſs of mind in ſo young a creature, which I thought your glory, and which was my boaſt in your character. In this inſtance it would be obſtinacy, and want of duty.—Have you not made objections to ſeveral— 

That was to theirminds,theirprinciples,Madam—But this man— 

Is an honeſt man, Clary Harlowe. He has a good mind.—He is a virtuous man. 

Hean honeſt man!Hisa good mind, Madam!Hea virtuous man!— 

No-body denies him theſe qualities. 

Canhebe an honeſt man who offers terms that will rob all his own relations of their juſt expectations?—Canhismind be good— 

You, Clary Harlowe, for whoſe ſake he offers ſo much, are the laſt perſon that ſhould make this obſervation. 

Give me leave, to ſay, Madam, that a perſon preferring happineſs to fortune, as I do; that want not even what Ihave,and can give up the uſe ofthat,as an inſtance of duty— 

No more, no more of your merits!—You know you will be a gainer by that chearful inſtance of your duty; not a loſer. You know you have butcaſt your bread upon the waters—So no more of that!—For it is not underſtood as a merit by every-body, I aſſure you; tho' I think it a high one; and ſo did your papa and uncles at the time— 

At the time,Madam!—How unworthily do my brother and ſiſter, who are afraid that the favour I was ſo lately in— 

I hear nothing againſt your brother and ſiſter—What family feuds have I in proſpect, at a time when I hoped moſt comfort from you all! 

God bleſs my brother and ſiſter, in all theirworthyviews! You ſhall have no family feuds, if I can prevent them. You yourſelf, M•dam, ſhall tell me what I ſhall bear from them, and I will bear it: But letmyactions, nottheirmiſrepreſentations (as I am ſure has been the caſe, by the diſgraceful prohibitions I have met with), ſpeak for me— 

Juſt then, up came my Papa, with a ſternneſs in his looks, that made me tremble!—He took two or three turns about my chamber—And then ſaid to my mamma, who was ſilent as ſoon as ſhe ſaw him— 

My dear, you are long abſent—Dinner is near ready. What you had to ſay, lay in a very little compaſs. Surely, you have nothing to do but to declareyourwill, andmywill!—But, perhaps, you may be talking of the preparations—Let us have you ſoon down—Your daughter in your hand, if worthy of the name. 

And down he went, caſting his eye upon me with a look ſo ſtern, that I was unable to ſay one word to him, or even, for a few minutes, to my mamma. 

Was not this very intimidating, my dear? 

My mamma, ſeeing my concern, ſeem'd to pity me. She called me her good child, and kiſſed me; told me my papa ſhould not know, that I had made ſuch oppoſition. He has kindly furniſh'd us with an excuſe for being ſo long together.—Come, my dear,—Dinner will be upon table preſently—Shall we go down? And took my hand. 

This made me ſtart: What, Madam, go down, to let it be ſuppoſed we were talking ofpreparations!—O my beloved mamma, command me not down upon ſuch a ſuppoſition. 

You ſee, child, that to ſtay longer together, will be owning that you are debating about an abſolute duty: And that will not be borne. Did not your papa himſelf, ſome days ago, tell you, he would be obey'd? I will a third time leave you. I muſt ſay ſomething by way of excuſe for you: And that you deſire not to go down to dinner—That your modeſty on the occaſion— 

O Madam! ſay not my modeſty onſuchan occaſion: For that will be to give hope— 

And deſign younotto give hope?—Perverſe girl!—Riſing, and flinging from me,take more time for conſideration!—Since it is neceſſary,takemore time—And when I ſee you next, let me know what blame I have to caſt upon myſelf, or to bear from your papa, for my indulgence to you. 

She made, however, a little ſtop at the chamber-door; and ſeem'd to expect, that I would have beſought her to make the gentleſt conſtruction for me; for heſitating, ſhe was pleaſed to ſay, I ſuppoſe, you would not have me make a report— 

O Madam, interrupted I, whoſe favour can I hope for, if I loſe my mamma's? 

To have deſired afavourablereport, you know, my dear, would have been qualifying upon a point that I was too much determin'd upon, to give room forany of my friends to think I have the leaſt heſitation about. And ſo my mamma went down ſtairs. 

I will depoſite thus far; and as I know you will not think me too minute in my relation of particulars ſo very intereſting to one you honour with your love, proceed in the ſame way. As matters ſtand, I don't care to have papers ſo freely written about me. 

Pray let Robert call every day, if you can ſpare him, whether I have any thing ready or not. 

I ſhould be glad you would not ſend him empty-handed. What a generoſity in you, to write as frequently from friendſhip, as I am forced to do from misfortune! The letters being taken away will be an aſſurance that you have them. As I ſhall write and depoſite as I have opportunity, the formality, ofſuperandſub-ſcription, will be excuſed. For I need not ſay how much I am, 

Your ſincere and ever-affectionate, CL. HARLOWE.LETTER XVII. MiſsCLARISSA HARLOWE,To MiſsHOWE.
MY mamma, on her return, which was as ſoon as ſhe had din'd, was pleaſed to inform me, that ſhe told my papa, on his queſtioning her about mychearfulcompliance (for it ſeems, thechearfulwas all that was doubted), that ſhe was willing, on ſo material a point, to give a child whom ſhe had ſomuch reaſon to love(as ſhe condeſcended to acknowlege were her words) liberty to ſay all that was in her heart to ſay, that her compliance might be the freer: Letting him know, that when he came up, ſhe was attending to my pleas; for that ſhe found I had rather not marry at all. 

She told me, that to this my papa angrily ſaid, Let her take care—Let her take care—that ſhe give me not ground to ſuſpect her of a preference ſomewhereelſe. But, if it be to eaſe her heart, and not to diſpute my will, you may hear her out. 

So, Clary, ſaid my mamma, I am returned in a temper accordingly, if you do not again, byyourperemptorineſs, ſhewme,how I ought to treatyou. 

Indeed, Madam, you did me juſtice, to ſay, I have no inclination to marry at all. I have not, I hope, made myſelf ſoveryunuſeful in my papa's f•mily, as— 

No more of your merits, Clary! You have been a good child: You have eaſed me of all the family cares: But do not now add more than ever you relieved me from. You have been richly repaid in the reputation your ſkill and management have given you:—But now there is ſoon to be a period to all thoſe aſſiſtances from you. If you marry, there will be a natural, and, if to pleaſe us, a deſirable period; becauſe your own family will employ all your talents in that way: If you do not, there will be a period likewiſe, butnota natural one:—You underſtand me, child. 

I wept. 

I have made inquiry already after a houſekeeper. I would have had your good Norton; but I ſuppoſe you will yourſelf wiſh to have the worthy woman with you. If you deſire it, that ſhall be agreed upon for you. 

But, why, deareſt Madam, why am I, theyoungeſt,to be precipitated into a ſtate, that I am ver•far from wiſhing to enter into with any-body? 

You are going to queſtion me, I ſuppoſe, why your ſiſter is not thought of for Mr. Solmes? 

I hope, Madam, it will not diſpleaſe you, if I were? 

I might refer you for an anſwer to yourpapa.—Mr. Solmes has reaſons for preferringyou— 

And ſo have I, Madam, for diſlikinghim.And why am I— 

This quickneſs upon me, interrupted my mamma, is not to be borne! I am gone, and your father comes, ifIcan do no good with you. 

Madam, I would rather die, than— 

She put her hand to my mouth.—No peremptorineſs, Clary Harlowe! Once you declare yourſelf inflexible, I have done. 

I wept for vexation. This is all, all, my brother's doings—His graſping views— 

No reflections upon your brother: He has intirely the honour of the family at heart. 

I would no more diſhonour my family, Madam, than my brother would. 

I believe it: But I hope you'll allow your papa, and me, and your uncles, to judge what will do it honour, what diſhonour! 

I then offer'd to live ſingle; never to marry at all; or never but with their full approbation. 

If I meant to ſhew my duty, and my obedience, I muſt ſhew it intheirway; notmy own. 

I ſaid, I hoped I had ſo behaved myſelf hitherto, that there was no need of ſuch a trial of my obedience as this. 

Yes, ſhe was pleaſed to ſay, I had behaved extremely well: But I had no trials till now: And ſhe hoped, that now I was called to one, I ſhould not fail in it. Parents, ſaid ſhe, when children are young, are pleaſed with every thing they do.—You have been a good child upon the whole: But we have hitherto rather comply'd with you, than you with us. Now that you are grown up to marriageable years, is the teſt; eſpecially as your grandfather has made you independent, as we may ſay, in preference to thoſe who had prior expectations upon that eſtate.— 

Madam, my grandfather knew, and expreſly mentions in his will his deſire, that my papa will more than make it up to my ſiſter—I did nothing but what I thought my duty, to procure his favour. It was rather a mark of his affection, than any advantage to me: For, do I either ſeek or wiſh to be independent?Were I to be queen of the univerſe, that, dignity ſhould not abſolve me from my duty to you and my papa. I would kneel for your bleſſings, were it in the preſence of millions—So that— 

I am loth to interruptyou,Clary; tho' you could more than once break in upon me—You are young and unbroken—But, with all this oſtentation of your duty, I deſire you to ſhew a little more deference to me when I am ſpeaking. 

I beg your pardon, dear Madam, and your patience with me on ſuch an occaſion as this.—If I did not ſpeak with earneſtneſs upon it, I ſhould be ſuppoſed to have only maidenly objections againſt a man I never can abide.— 

Clary Harlowe— 

Deareſt, deareſt Madam, permit me to ſpeak what I have to ſay, this once—It is hard, it is very hard, to be forbid to enter into the cauſe of all, becauſe I muſt not ſpeak diſrepectfully of one who ſuppoſes me in the way of his ambition, and treats me like a ſlave— 

Whither, whither, Clary— 

My deareſt mamma!—My duty will not permit me ſo far to ſuppoſe my father arbitrary, as to make a plea of that arbitrarineſs to you.— 

How now, Clary!—O girl!— 

Your patience, my deareſt mamma:—You were pleaſed toſay,you would hear me with patience.—PERSON, in a man is nothing, becauſe I am ſuppoſed to be prudent: So my eye is to be diſguſted, and my reaſon not convinced.— 

Girl, girl!— 

Thus are my imputed good qualities to be made my puniſhment; and I am to be wedded to amonſter.— 

(Aſtoniſhing!—Can this, Clariſſa, be from you?— 

The man, Madam, perſon and mind, is a monſter in my eye.)—And that I may be induced to bear thistreatment, I am to be complimented with being indifferent to all men: Yet, at other times, and to ſerve other purpoſes, am I to be thought prepoſſeſſed in favour of a man againſt whoſe moral character lie juſt objections.—Confined, as if, like the giddieſt of creatures, I would run away with this man, and diſgrace my whole family!—O my deareſt mamma! who can be patient under ſuch treatment? 

Now, Clary, I ſuppoſe you will allowmeto ſpeak. I think I have had patience indeed with you.—Could I have thought—But I will put all upon a ſhort iſſue. Yourmamma,Clariſſa, ſhall ſhew you an example of that patience, you ſo boldly claim fromher,without havingany yourſelf. 

O my dear, how my mamma's condeſcenſion diſtreſſed me at the time! infinitely more diſtreſſed me, than rigour could have done. But ſheknew,ſhe was to be ſureaware,that ſhe was put upon a harſh ſervice; an unreaſonable ſervice, let me ſay; or ſhe would not, ſhe could not, have had ſo much patience with me. 

Let me tell you then, proceeded ſhe, that all lies in a ſmall compaſs, as your papa ſaid.—You have been hitherto, as you are pretty ready to plead, a dutiful child—You have indeed had nocauſeto be otherwiſe; no child was ever more favour'd—Whether you will diſcredit all your paſt actions; whether, at a time and upon an occaſion that the higheſt inſtance of duty is expected from you (an inſtance that is to crown all); and when you declare thatyour heart is free—you will give that inſtance; or whether, having a view to the independence you may claim (for ſo, Clary, whatever be your motive, it will be judged), and which any man you favour, can aſſertfor you againſtus all; or ratherfor himſelf,inſpiteof us—Whether, I ſay, you will break with us all; and ſtand in defiance of a jealous papa; needleſsly jealous, I will venture to ſay, of the prerogativesof his ſex, as to me, and ſtill ten times more jealous of the authority of a father;—This is now the point with us. You know your papa has made it a point; and did he ever give up one he thought he had a right to carry? 

Too true, thought I to myſelf! And now my brother has engag'd my father, his fine ſcheme willwalk alone,without needing his leading-ſtrings; and it is become my father's will that I oppoſe; not my brother's graſping views. 

I was ſilent. To ſay the truth, I was juſt thenſullenlyſilent. My heart was too big. I thought it was hard to be thus given up by my mamma; and that ſhe ſhould make a will ſo uncontroulable as my brother's, her will. 

But this ſilence availed me ſtill leſs.— 

I ſee, my dear, ſaid ſhe, that you are convinc'd. Now, my good child, now, my Clary, do I love you! It ſhall not be known, that you have argued with me at all: All ſhall be imputed to that modeſty, which has ever ſo much diſtinguiſh'd you. You ſhall have the full merit of your reſignation. 

I wept. 

She tenderly wip'd the tears from my eyes, and kiſs'd my cheek—Your papa expects you down, with a chearful countenance—But I will excuſe your going: All your ſcruples, you ſee, have met with an indulgence truly maternal from me. I rejoice in the hope that you are convinc'd. This indeed ſeems to be a proof of the welcome truth you have aſſerted, Thatyour heart is free. 

Did not this ſeem to border uponcruelty,my dear, in ſo indulgent a mamma?—It would be wicked (would it not?) to ſuppoſe my mamma capable ofart—But ſhe is put upon it; and obliged to take methods her heart is naturally above ſtooping to; and all intended for my good, becauſe ſhe ſees that no arguing will be admitted any-where elſe. 

I will go down, proceeded ſhe, and excuſe your attendance at afternoon-tea, as I did to dinner: For I know you will have ſome little reluctances to conquer. I will allow you thoſe; and alſo ſome little natural ſhyneſſes—And ſo youſhan'tcome down, if you chooſenotto come down—Only, my dear, don't diſgrace my report when you come to ſupper. And beſure behave as you uſed to do to your brother and ſiſter; for your behaviour to them will be one teſt of your chearful obedience to us. I adviſe as a friend, you ſee, rather than command as a mother—So adieu, my love: And again ſhe kiſſed me; and was going. 

O my dear mamma, ſaid I, forgive me!—But ſurely you cannot believe, I can ever think of having that man! 

She was very angry, and ſeemed to be greatly diſappointed. She threatened to turn me over to my papa and my uncles:—She bid me (generouſly bid me) conſider, if I thought my brother and ſiſter had views to ſerve by making my uncles diſſatisfied with me, what a handle I gave them. She told me, That ſhe had early ſaid all that ſhe thought could be ſaid againſt the preſent propoſal, on a ſuppoſition, that I, who had refuſed ſeveral others (whom ſhe own'd to be preferable as to perſon) ſhouldnotapprove of it; and could ſhe have prevailed, I had never heard of it: And if SHE could not, how couldIexpect it?—That it was equally my good (in order to preſerve to me the ſhare I had hitherto held in every-body's affections), and her own peace, that ſhe wiſhed to promote by the taſk ſhe had undertaken:—That my papa would flame out, upon my refuſal to comply:—That my uncles were ſo much convinced of the conſiſtence of the meaſure with their favourite views of aggrandizing the family, that they were as much determin'd as my papa:—That my aunt Hervey and my uncle Hervey were of the ſame party:—That it was hard, if afather and mother, and uncles, and aunt, all conjoin'd, could not be allowed to direct my choice:—That, ſurely, I was not themoreaverſe, becauſe thefamily viewwould be promoted by the match:—That this would be the light, ſhe could aſſure me, in which my refuſal would be taken by every-body:—That all the aſſeverations I could make of living ſingle, while the man who was ſo obnoxious to everybody, remain'd unmarry'd, and while hebuzz'dabout me, was the word, would have no weight with any of them:—That if Mr. Lovelace were an angel, and my father made it a point that I ſhould not have him, I muſt be ſenſible he would not have his will diſputed: Eſpecially, as it was not doubted, that I correſponded with him: To the belief of which, and that it was by Miſs Howe's means, were owing the prohibition, laid upon me, ſo much againſt her liking, ſhe was pleaſed to ſay. 

I anſwer'd to every article ſhe had ſpoken to as above, in ſuch a manner, as I am ſure would have ſatisfy'd her, could ſhe have been permitted to judge for herſelf; and then inveighed with bitterneſs againſt the diſgraceful prohibitions laid upon me. 

They would ſerve to ſhew me, ſhe was pleaſed to ſay, how much in earneſt my papa was. They might be taken off, whenever I thought fit, and no harm done, nor diſgrace received. But if I were to be contumacious, I might thank myſelf for all that would follow. 

I ſigh'd. I wept. I was ſilent. 

Shall I, Clary, ſaid ſhe, tell your papa, that theſe prohibitions are as unneceſſary, as I hoped they would be? That you know yourduty,and will not offer to controvert his will?—What ſay you, my love? 

O Madam, what can I ſay to queſtions ſo indulgently put? I do indeedknowmy duty: No creature in the world is more willing topractiſeit: But, pardon me, deareſt Madam, if I ſay, That I muſt beartheſe prohibitions, if I am to pay ſo dear to have them taken off. 

Determin'd and perverſe, my dear mamma called me: And after walking twice or thrice in anger about the room, ſhe turn'd to me;—Your heartfree!Clariſſa! How can you tell me your heart is free? Such extraordinary antipathies to a particular perſon muſt be owing to extraordinary prepoſſeſſions in another's favour!—Tell me, Clary; and tell me truly—Do you not continue to correſpond with Mr. Lovelace? 

Deareſt Madam, reply'd I, you know my motives: To prevent miſchief, I anſwer'd his Letters. The reaſon for our apprehenſions of this ſort are not over. 

I own to you, Clary, altho' now I would not have it known, that I once thought a little qualifying among ſuch violent ſpirits, was not amiſs. I did not know but all things would come round again by Lord M.'s and his two ſiſters mediation: But as they all three think proper to reſent for their nephew; and as their nephew thinks fit to defy us all; and as terms are offer'd on another hand, that could not be aſked, which will very probably prevent your grandfather's eſtate going out of the family, and may be a means to bring a ſtill greater into it; I ſee not, that the continuance of your correſpondence with him either can, or ought to be permitted. I therefore now forbid it to you, as you value my favour. 

Be pleaſed, Madam, only to adviſe me how to break it off with ſafety to my brother and uncles; and it is all I wiſh for. Would to heaven, the man ſo hated had not the pretence to make of having been too violently treated, when he meant peace and reconciliation! It would always have been i•my own power to have broke with him:—His reputed immoralities would have given me a juſt pretence at any time to do ſo—But, Madam, as my uncles and my brother will keep no meaſures;—as he has heardwhat the view is; and as I have reaſon to think, that he is only reſtrained by his regard for me from reſenting their violent treatment of him and his family; what can I do?—Would you have me, Madam, make him deſperate? 

The Law will protect us, child!—Offended magiſtracy will aſſert itſelf— 

But, Madam, may not ſome dreadful miſchief firſt happen?—The Law aſſerts not itſelf, till it is offended. 

You have made offers, Clary, if you might be obliged in the point in queſtion:—Are you really in earneſt, on that condition to break off all correſpondence with Mr. Lovelace?—Let me know this. 

Indeed, I am; and I will. You, Madam, ſhall ſee every letter that has paſſed between us. You ſhall ſee I have given him no encouragement, independent of my duty:—And when you have ſeen them, you will be better able to direct me how, on that condition, to break intirely with him. 

I take you at your word, Clariſſa: Give mehisletters; and the copies ofyours. 

I am ſure, Madam, you will keep the knowlege that I write, and what I write— 

No conditions with your mamma—Surely my prudence may be truſted to. 

I begg'd her pardon; and beſought her to take the key of the private drawer in my eſcrutoire, where they lay, that ſhe herſelf might ſee, that I had no reſerves to my mamma. 

She did; and took all his letters, and the copies of mine.—Un-condition'd with, ſhe was pleaſed to ſay, they ſhall be yours again, unſeen by any-body elſe. 

I thank'd her; and ſhe withdrew to read them; ſaying, ſhe would return them, when ſhe had. 

YOU, my dear, have ſeen all the letters that have paſſed between him and me, till my laſt return fromyou: You have acknowleg'd, that he has nothing to boaſt of, from them: Three others I have received ſince, by the private conveyance I told you of; the laſt I have not yet anſwer'd. 

In theſe three, as in thoſe you have ſeen, after having beſought my favour, and, in the moſt earneſt manner, profeſſed the ſincerity of his paſſion for me; and ſet forth the indignities done him; the defiances my brother throws out againſt him in all companies; the menaces, and hoſtile appearance of my uncles, where-ever they go, or come; and the methods they take to defame him; he declares,'That neither his own honour, nor his family's (involved as that is in the undiſtinguiſhing reflections caſt upon him for an unhappy affair, which he would have ſhunn'd, but could not), permit him to bear theſe confirmed indignities: That as my inclinations, if not favourable tohim,cannot be, nor are, to ſuch a man as the new-ſet-up Solmes, he is intereſted the more to reſent my brother's behaviour; who to every-body avows his rancour and malice; and glories in the probability he has, thro' this Solmes's addreſs, of mortifyingme,and avenging himſelf onhim:That it is impoſſible, he ſhould not think himſelf concern'd to fruſtrate a meaſure, ſo directly level'd at him, had he not ſtill a higher motive for hoping to fruſtrate it: That I muſt forgive him, if he enters into conference with Solmes upon it. He earneſtly inſiſts upon what he has ſo often propoſed, That I will give him leave, in company with Lord M. to wait upon my uncles, and even upon my papa or mamma; promiſing patience, if new provocations, abſolutely beneath a man to bear, are not given:'Which, by the way, I am far from being able to engage for. 

In my anſwer, I abſolutely declare, as I tell him I have often done,'That he is to expect no favour from me, againſt the approbation of my friends:That I am ſure their conſents for his viſiting any of them will never be obtained: That I will not be either ſo undutiful, or ſo indiſcreet, as to ſuffer my intereſts to be ſeparated from the intereſts of my family, for any man on earth: That I do not think myſelfobligedto him for the forbearance I deſire one flameing ſpirit to have with others: That in this deſire I require nothing of him, but what prudence, juſtice, and the laws of his country, oblige from him: That if he has any expectations of favour from me, on that account, he deceives himſelf: That I have no inclination, as I have often told him, to change my condition: That I cannot allow myſelf to correſpond with him any longer in this clandeſtine manner: It is mean, low, undutiful, I tell him; and has a giddy appearance, which cannot be excuſed: That therefore he is not to expect, that Iwillcontinue it.' 

To this, in his laſt, among other things, he replies;'That if I am actually determin'd to break off all correſpondence with him, he muſt conclude, that it is with a view to become the wife of a man, whom no woman of honour and fortune can think tolerable. And in that caſe, I muſt excuſe him for ſaying, that he ſhall neither be able to bear the thoughts of loſing for ever a perſon in whom all his preſent, and all his future hopes are centred; nor ſupport himſelf with patience under the inſolent triumphs of my brother upon it: But that he will not preſume to threaten either his own life, or that of any other man. He muſt take his reſolutions as ſuch a dreaded event ſhall impell him, at the time. If he ſhall know that it will be with my own conſent, he muſt endeavour to reſign to his deſtiny: But if it be brought about by compulſion, he ſhall not be able to anſwer for the conſequence.' 

I will ſend you theſe letters for your peruſal, in a few days. I would incloſe them; but that it is poſſible ſomething may happen, which may make mymamma require to ſee them again.—You will ſee, my dear, by his, how he endeavours to hold me to this correſpondence. 

IN about an hour my mamma return'd. Take your letters, Clary: I have nothing to taſk your diſcretion with, as to the wording of yours to him: You have even kept up a proper dignity, as well as decorum: And you have reſented, as you ought to reſent, his menacing invectives. Butcanyou think from the avowed hatred of one ſide, and the avowed defiance of the other, that this can be a ſuitable match?Canyou think it becomes you to encourage an addreſs from a man who has fought a duel with your brother, let his fortune and profeſſions be what they will? 

By no means it can, Madam; you will be pleaſed to obſerve, that I have ſaid as much to him. But now, Madam, the whole correſpondence is before you; and I beg your commands what to do in a ſituation ſo very diſagreeable. 

One thing I will tell you, Clary Harlowe: But I charge you, as you would not have me queſtion the generoſity of your ſpirit, to take no advantage of it, eithermentallyorverbally,were the words: That I am ſo much pleaſed with the offer of your keys to me, in ſo chearful and unreſerved a manner, and in the prudence you have ſhewn in your letters, that were it practicable to bring every one, or your father only, into my opinion, I ſhould readily leave all the reſt to your diſcretion, reſerving only to myſelf the direction or approbation of your future letters; and to ſee, that you broke off the correſpondence, as ſoon as poſſible. But as it is not, and as I know your papa would have no patience with you, ſhould it be acknowleg'd that you correſpond with Mr. Lovelace, or that youhavecorreſponded with him ſince the time he prohibitedyou ſo to do; I forbid you continuing ſuch a liberty. Yet, as the caſe is difficult, let me aſk you, What you yourſelf can propoſe? Your heart, youſay, is free.You own, that you cannot think, as matters are circumſtanced, that a match with a man ſo obnoxious as he now is to us all, is proper to be thought of: What do you propoſe to do?—What, Clary, are your own thoughts of the matter? 

Without heſitation (for I ſaw I was upon a new trial) thus I anſwer'd—What I humbly propoſe is this:—'That I will write to Mr. Lovelace (for I have not anſwer'd his laſt) that he has nothing to do between my father and me: That I neitheraſkhis advice, norneedit: But that ſince he thinks he has ſome pretence for interfering, becauſe of my brother's avowal of the intereſt of Mr. Solmes in malice to him, I will aſſure him, without giving him any reaſon to impute the aſſurance to be in the leaſt favourable to himſelf, that I never will be that man's.'And if, proceeded I, I may be permitted to give him this aſſurance; and Mr. Solmes, in conſequence of it, be diſcouraged from proſecuting his addreſs; let Mr. Lovelace be ſatisfy'd or diſſatisfy'd, I will go no farther; nor write another line to him; nor ever ſee him more, if I can avoid it: And ſhall have a good excuſe for it, without bringing in any of my family. 

Ah! my love!—But what ſhall we do about thetermsMr. Solmes offers? Thoſe are the inducements with every-body: He has even given hopes to your brother that he will make exchanges of eſtates; or at leaſt, that he will purchaſe the northern one; for, you know, it muſt be intirely conſiſtent with the family views, that we increaſe our intereſt in this county. Your brother, in ſhort, has given in a plan that captivates us all: And a family ſo rich in all its branches, that has it's views to honour, muſt be pleaſed to ſee a very great probability of being on a footing with the principal in the kingdom. 

And for the ſake of theſe views, for the ſake of this plan of my brother's, am I, Madam, to be given in marriage to a man I never can endure!—O my dear mamma, ſave me, ſave me, if you can, from this heavy evil!—I had rather be bury'd alive, indeed I had, than have that man! 

She chid me for my vehemence; but was ſo good as to tell me, That ſhe would venture to talk with my uncle Harlowe, and, if he encourag'd her (or would engage to ſecond her), with my papa; and I ſhould hear further in the morning. 

She went down to tea, and kindly undertook to excuſe my attendance at ſupper: And I immediately had recourſe to my pen, to give you theſe particulars. 

But is it not a ſad thing, I repeat, to be obliged to ſtand in oppoſition to the will of ſuch a mamma? Why, as I often ſay to myſelf, was ſuch a man as this Solmes fix'd upon? The only man in the world, ſurely, that could offer ſo much, and deſerve ſo little! 

Little indeed does he deſerve!—Why, my dear, the man has the moſt indifferent of characters. Every mouth is open'd againſt him for his ſordid ways—Afooliſhman, to be ſo baſe-minded!—When the difference between the obtaining of a fame for generoſity, and incurring the cenſure of being a miſer, will not, prudently manag'd, coſt fifty pounds a year. 

What a name have you got, at a leſs expence? And what an opportunity had he of obtaining credit at a very ſmall one, ſucceeding ſuch a wretched creature as Sir Oliver, in fortunes ſo vaſt?—Yet has he ſo behaved, that the common phraſe is apply'd to him,That SirOliverwill never be dead, while Mr.Solmeslives. 

The world, as I have often thought, ill-natured as it is ſaid to be, is generally more juſt in characters (ſpeaking by what itfeels), than is uſually apprehended: And thoſe who complain moſt of its cenſoriouſneſs,perhaps ſhould lookinwardlyfor the occaſion oftener than they do. 

My heart is a little at eaſe, on the hopes that my mamma will be able to procure favour for me, and a deliverance from this man; and ſo I have leiſure to moralize: But if I hadnot,I ſhould not forbear to intermingle occaſionally theſe ſort of remarks, becauſe you command me never to omit them when they occur to my mind: And not to be able to make them, even in a more affecting ſituation, when one ſits down to write, would ſhew one's-ſelf more engaged toſelf,and one'sownconcerns, than attentive to the wiſhes of a friend. If it be ſaid, that it isnaturalſo to be, what makes thatnature,on occaſions where a friend may be obliged, or reminded of a piece of inſtruction, which, writing down, one's-ſelf may be the better for, but afault; which it would ſet a perſon above nature to ſubdue? 

LETTER XVIII. MiſsCLARISSA HARLOWE,To MiſsHOWE.
Sat. Mar. 4.WOULD you not have thought, that ſomething might have been obtained in my favour, from an offer ſo reaſonable, from an expedient ſo proper, as I imagine, to put a tolerable end, asfrom myſelf,to a correſpondence I hardly know how, otherwiſe, with ſafety to ſome of my family, to get rid of!—But my brother's plan (which my mamma ſpoke of, and of which I have in vain endeavour'd to procure a copy, with a deſign of taking it to pieces, and expoſing it, as I queſtion not there is room to do), together with my papa's impatience of contradiction, is irreſiſtible. 

I have not been in bed all night; nor am I in the leaſt drouſy. Expectation, and hope, and doubt (an uneaſy ſtate!), kept me ſufficiently wakeful. I ſteptdown at my uſual time, that it might not be known I had not been in bed; and gave directions in the family way. 

About eight o' clock Shorey came to me from my mamma, with orders to attend her in her chamber. 

My mamma had been weeping, I ſaw by her eyes: But her aſpect ſeem'd to be leſs tender, and leſs affectionate, than the day before; and this ſtruck me with an awe, as ſoon as I entered her preſence, which gave a great damp to my ſpirits. 

Sit down, Clary Harlowe; I ſhall talk to you by-and-by: And was looking into a drawer among laces and linen, in a way neither buſy nor unbuſy. 

After ſome time, ſhe aſk'd me coldly, What directions I had given for the day? 

I gave her the bill of fare for this day, and tomorrow, if, I ſaid, it pleaſed her to approve of it. 

She made a ſmall alteration in it; but with an air ſo cold and ſo ſolemn, as added to the emotions I enter'd into her preſence with. 

Mr. Harlowe talks of dining out to-day, I think, at my brother Antony's.— 

Mr. Harlowe!—Not my papa!—Have I not then a papa!—thought I? 

Sit down when I bid you. 

I ſat down. 

You look very ſullen, Clary. 

I hope not, Madam. 

If children would always be children—parents—And there ſhe ſtopt. 

She then went to her toilette, and looked in the glaſs, and gave half a ſigh—the other half, as if ſhe would not have ſighed, could ſhe have help'd it, ſhe gently hem'd away. 

I don't love to ſee the girl look ſo ſullen. 

Indeed, Madam, I am not ſullen.—And I aroſe, and, turning from her, drew out my handkerchief, for the tears ran down my cheeks. I thought, bythe glaſs before me, I ſaw themotherin her ſoften'd eye caſt towards me.—But her words confirm'd not the hop'd-for tenderneſs. 

One of the provoking'ſt things in the world is, to have people cry for what they can help! 

I wiſh to heaven I could, Madam!—and I ſobb'd again. 

Tears of penitence and ſobs of perverſeneſs are mighty well ſuited!—You may go up to your chamber. I ſhall talk with you by-and-by. 

I courteſy'd with reverence.— 

Mock me not with outward geſture of reſpect. The heart, Clary, is what I want. 

Indeed, Madam, you have it. It is not ſo much mine, as my mamma's! 

Fine talking!—As ſomebody ſays, If words were duty, Clariſſa Harlowe would be the dutifulleſt child breathing. 

God bleſs that ſomebody!—Be it whom it will, God bleſs that ſomebody!—And I courteſy'd, and, purſuant to her laſt command, was going. 

She ſeem'd ſtruck; butwasto be angry with me. 

So turning from me, ſhe ſpoke with quickneſs, Whither now, Clary Harlowe? 

You commanded me, Madam, to go to my chamber. 

I ſee you are very ready to go out of my preſence. Is your compliance the effect of ſullenneſs, or obedience?—You are very ready to leave me. 

I could hold no longer; but threw myſelf at her feet: O my deareſt mamma! Let me know all I am to ſuffer: Let me know what I am to be! I will bear it, if Icanbear it: But your diſpleaſure I cannot bear! 

Leave me, leave me, Clary Harlowe!—No kneeling!—Limbs ſo ſupple; Will ſo ſtubborn!—Riſe, I tell you. 

I cannot riſe! I will diſobey my mamma, whenſhe bids me leave her, without her being reconciled to me! No ſullens, my mamma: No perverſeneſs: But, worſe than either, This is direct diſobedience!—Yet tear not yourſelf from me! (wrapping my arms about her as I kneeled; ſhe ſtruggling to get from me; my face lifted up to hers, with eyes running over, that ſpoke not my heart if they were not all humility and reverence.) You muſt not, muſt not, tear yourſelf from me! (for ſtill the dear lady ſtruggled, and looked this way and that, in a ſweet diſorder, as if ſhe knew not what to do.)—I will neither riſe, nor leave you, nor let you go, till you ſay you are not angry with me. 

O thou ever-moving child of my heart! (folding her dear arms about my neck, as mine embraced her knees.) Why was this taſk!—But leave me!—You have diſcompoſed me beyond expreſſion!—Leave me, my dear!—I won't be angry with you—if I can help it—if you'll be good. 

I aroſe trembling, and, hardly knowing what I did, or how I ſtood or walk'd, withdrew to my chamber. My Hannah followed me, as ſoon as ſhe heard me quit my mamma's preſence, and with ſalts and ſpring-water juſt kept me from fainting; and that was as much as ſhe could do. It was near two hours before I could ſo far recover myſelf as to take up my pen, to write to you how unhappily my hopes have ended. 

My mamma went down to breakfaſt. I was not fit to appear: But if I had been better, I ſuppoſe I ſhould not have been ſent for; my papa's hint, when in my chamber, being, To bring me down, if worthy of the name of daughter. That, I doubt, I never ſhall be inhisopinion, if he be not brought to change his mind as to this Mr. Solmes. 

LETTER XIX. MiſsCLARISSA HARLOWE,To MiſsHOWE.[In anſwer to LetterXV.]
Sat. March 4. 12 o' clock.HANNAH has juſt now brought me from the uſual place your favour of yeſterday. The contents of it have made me very thoughtful; and you will have an anſwer in my graveſt ſtyle.—Ito have that Mr. Solmes!—No indeed!—I will ſooner—But I will write firſt to other parts of your letter that are leſs concerning, that I may touch upon this part with more patience. 

As to what you mention of my ſiſter's value for Mr. Lovelace, I am not very much ſurpriſed at it. She takes ſuchofficiouspains, and it is ſo much her ſubject, to have it thought that ſhe neverdid,and nevercouldlike him, that ſhe gives but too much room to ſuſpect her. Then ſhe never tells the ſtory of their parting, and of her refuſal of him, but her colour riſes, ſhe looks with diſdain upon me, and mingles anger with the airs ſhe gives herſelf:—Both anger and airs, at leaſt, demonſtrating, that ſhe refuſed a man whom ſhe thought worth accepting: Where elſe is the reaſon either for anger or boaſt?—Poor Bella! She is to be pity'd!—She cannot either like or diſlike with temper!—Would to heaven ſhe had been miſtreſs of all her wiſhes!—Would to heaven ſhe had!— 

As to the article of giving up to my papa's controul the eſtate bequeathed me, my motives at the time, as you acknowlege, were not blameable. Your advice to me on the ſubject was grounded, as I remember, on your good opinion of me; believing that I ſhould not make a bad uſe of the power willed me: Neither you nor I, my dear, altho' you now aſſume the air of a diviner (pardon me), could have believed That would have happen'd which has happen'd, as to myfather'spart particularly. You were indeed jealous of my brother's views againſt me; or rather of his predominant love of Self; but I did not think ſo hardly of my brother and ſiſter, as you always did. You never loved them; and ill-will has eyes always open to the faulty ſide; as good-will or love is blind even to real imperfections. I will briefly recollect my motives. 

I found jealouſies and uneaſineſs riſing in every breaſt, where all before was unity and love: The honoured teſtator was reflected upon: A ſecond childhood was attributed to him; and I was cenſured, as having taken advantage of it. All young creatures, thought I, more or leſs, covet independency; but thoſe who wiſh moſt for it, are ſeldom the fitteſt to be truſted either with the government of themſelves, or with power over others. This is certainly a very high and unuſual bequeſt to ſo young a creature. We ſhould not aim atallwe have power to do. To take all that good-nature, or indulgence, or good opinion confers, ſhews a want of moderation, and a graſpingneſs that is unworthy of that indulgence; and are bad indications of theuſethat may be made of the power bequeathed. It is true, thought I, that I have formed agreeable ſchemes of making others as happy as myſelf, by the proper diſcharge of the ſtewardſhip intruſted to me (Are not all eſtates ſtewardſhips, my dear?): But let me examine myſelf: Is not vanity, or ſecret love of praiſe, a principal motive with me at the bottom?—Ought I not to ſuſpect my own heart? If I ſet up for myſelf, puffed up with every one's good opinion, may I not beleftto myſelf?—Every one's eyes are upon the conduct, upon the viſits, upon the viſit-orsof a young creature of our ſex, made independent: And are not ſuch, moreover, the ſubjects of the attempts of theworſtof the other?—And then, left to myſelf, ſhould I take a wrong ſtep, tho' with ever ſo good an intention, how many ſhould I have to triumph over me, how few to pity?—The moreof the one, and the fewer of the other, for having aimed at excelling. 

Theſe were ſome of my reflections at the time: And I have no doubt, but that in the ſame ſituation I ſhould do the very ſame thing; and that upon the matureſt deliberation. Who can command or foreſee events? To act up to our beſt judgments at the time, is all we can do. If I have err'd, 'tis to worldly wiſdom only that I have err'd. If we ſuffer by an act of duty, or even by an act of generoſity, is it not pleaſurable on reflection, that the fault is in others, rather than in ourſelves?—I had rather, a vaſt deal, have reaſon to think others unkind, than that they ſhould have any to think me undutiful. And ſo, my dear, I am ſure had you. 

And now for themoſtconcerning part of your letter. 

You think I muſt of neceſſity be Mr. Solmes's wife, as matters are circumſtanced. I will not be very raſh, my dear, in proteſting to the contrary: But I think it never, never can, noroughtto be!—My temper, I know, is depended upon: But I have heretofore ſaid, that I have ſomething in me of my father's family, as well as of my mother'sSee Letterix.p.50.. And have I any encouragement to follow too implicitly the example which my mamma ſets of meekneſs, and reſignedneſs to the wills of others?—Is ſhe not for ever obliged to be, as ſhe was pleaſed to hint to me, of theforbearingſide? In my mamma's caſe, your obſervation is verify'd, that thoſe who will bear much, ſhall have much to bear:—What is it, as ſhe ſays, thatſhehas not ſacrificed to peace?—Yet, hasſheby her ſacrifices always found the peace ſhe has deſerved to find? Indeed No!—I am afraid the very contrary. And often and often have I had reaſon, on her account, to reflect, that we poor mortals, by ourover-ſollicitude to preſerve undiſturbed the qualities we are conſtitutionally fond of, frequently loſe the benefits we propoſe to ourſelves from them:Since the deſigning and incroaching, finding out what we moſt fear to forfeit, direct their batteries againſt theſe our weaker places, and, making an artillery, if I may ſo phraſe it, of our hopes and fears, play it upon us at their pleaſure. 

Steadineſs of mind (a quality which the ill-bred and cenſorious deny to any of our ſex), when one is convinced of being in the right (otherwiſe it is not ſteadineſs, but obſtinacy), and inmaterialcaſes, is a quality, my good Dr. Lewin was wont to ſay, that brings great credit to the poſſeſſor of it; at the ſame time that it uſually, whentry'dandknown,raiſesſuchabove the attempts of the meanly machinating. He uſed therefore to inculcate upon me this ſteadineſs, upon laudable convictions. And why may I not think that I am now put upon an exerciſe of it?—I have ſaid, that I never can be, that I never ought to be, Mrs. Solmes.—I repeat, that Ioughtnot: For ſurely, my dear, I ſhould not give up to my brother's ambition the happineſs of my future life.—Surely I ought not to be the inſtrument to deprive Mr. Solmes's relations of their natural rights and reverſionary proſpects, for the ſake of further aggrandizing a family (altho'thatI am of) which already lives in great affluence and ſplendor; and who might be as juſtly diſſatisfy'd, were what ſome ſome of them aim at to be obtained, that they were not princes, as now they are, that they are not peers (for when ever was an ambitious mind, as you obſerve in the caſe of avariceSee Letterx.p.55., ſatisfy'd by acquiſition?). The leſs, ſurely, ought I to give into theſe graſping views of my brother, as I myſelf heartily deſpiſe the end aimed at; as I wiſh not either to change my ſtate, or better my fortunes; and as I am fully perſuaded, that happineſs and riches aretwothings, and very ſeldom meet together. 

Yet I dread, I exceedingly dread, the conflicts I know I muſt encounter with. It is poſſible, that Imay be more unhappy from the due obſervation of the good doctor's general precept, than were I to yield the point; ſince what I callſteadineſsis attributed to ſtubbornneſs, to obſtinacy, to prepoſſeſſion, by thoſe who have a right to put what interpretation they pleaſe upon my conduct. 

So, my dear, were we perfect, which no one can be, we could not be happy in this life, unleſs thoſe with whom we have to deal (thoſe, more eſpecially, who have any controul upon us), were govern'd by the ſame principles. What have we then to do, but as I have hinted above, to chooſe right, and purſue it ſteadily, and leave the iſſue to Providence? 

This, if you approve of my motives (and if you don't, pray inform me), muſt be my aim in the preſent caſe. 

But what then can I plead for a palliation tomyſelfof my mamma's ſufferings onmyaccount? Perhaps This conſideration will carry ſome force with it;—Thatherdifficulties cannot laſt long; only till this great ſtruggle ſhall be one way or other determin'd.—Whereasmyunhappineſs, if I comply, will (from an averſion not to be overcome) be for life. To which let me add, That, as I have reaſon to think that the preſent meaſures are not enter'd upon with her own natural liking, ſhe will have the leſs pain, ſhould they want the ſucceſs which I think in my heart they ought to want. 

I have run a great length in a very little time. The ſubject touch'd me to the quick. My reflections upon it will give you reaſon to expect from me a perhapstooſteady behaviour in a new conference, which, I find, I muſt have with my mamma. My father and brother, as ſhe was pleaſed to tell me, dine at my uncle Antony's, on purpoſe, as I have reaſon to believe, to give an opportunity for it. 

Hannah informs me, that ſhe heard my papa high and angry with my mamma, at taking leave ofher: I ſuppoſe for being too favourable to me; for Hannah heard her ſay, as in tears,'Indeed, Mr. Harlowe, you greatly diſtreſs me!—The poor girl does not deſerve—'Hannah heard no more, but that he ſaid, he would break ſomebody's heart—Mine, I ſuppoſe.—Not my mother's, I hope. 

As only my ſiſter dines with my mamma, I thought I ſhould have been commanded down: But ſhe ſent me up a plate from her table. I wrote on. I could not touch a morſel: I order'd Hannah however, to eat of it, that I might not be thought ſullen. 

I will ſee, before I conclude this, whether any thing offers fromeitherof my private correſpondencies, that will make it proper to add to it; and will take a turn in the wood-yard and garden for that purpoſe. 

I am ſtopp'd. Hannah ſhall depoſite this. She was order'd by my mamma, who aſk'd where I was, to tell me, that ſhe would come up and talk with me in my own cloſet.—She is coming! Adieu, my dear. 

LETTER XX. MiſsCLARISSA HARLOWE,To MiſsHOWE.
Sat. P. M.THE expected conference is over: But my difficulties are increaſed. This, as my mamma was pleaſed to tell me, being the laſtperſuaſoryeffort that will be attempted, I will be as particular in the account of it as my head and my heart will allow me to be. 

I have made, ſaid ſhe, as ſhe enter'd my room, a ſhort as well as early dinner, on purpoſe to confer with you: And I do aſſure you, that it will be the laſt conference I ſhall either be permitted orinclinedto hold with you on the ſubject, if you ſhould prove as refractory as ſome, whom I hope you'll diſappoint, imagine youwill; and thereby demonſtrate, that I have not the weight with you that my indulgence to you deſerves. 

Your papa both dines and ſups at your uncle's, on purpoſe to give us this opportunity; and as I ſhall make my report (which I have promiſed to do very faithfully) on his return, he will take his meaſures with you. 

I was offering to ſpeak—Hear, Clariſſa, what I have to tell you, ſaid ſhe, before you ſpeak, unleſs what you have to ſay will ſignify to me your compliance—Say—willit?—If itwill,you may ſpeak. 

I was ſilent. 

She looked with concern and anger upon me—No compliance, I find!—Such a dutiful young creature hitherto!—Will you not, can you not, ſpeak as I would have you ſpeak?—Then, rejecting me, as it were, with her hand, then, continue ſilent.—I,no more than yourfather,will bear youravowedcontradiction!— 

She pauſed, with a look of expectation, as if ſhe waited for my conſenting anſwer. 

I was ſtill ſilent; looking down; the tears in my eyes. 

O thou determin'd girl!—But ſay; ſpeak out; are you reſolved to ſtand in oppoſition to us all, in a point our hearts are ſet upon? 

May I, Madam, be permitted to expoſtulate? 

To what purpoſe expoſtulate withme,Clariſſa? Yourfatheris determin'd. Have I not told you, that there is no receding; that the honour, as well as the benefit, of the family is concerned? Be ingenuous: You uſed to be ſo, even againſt yourſelf—Who at the long runmuſtſubmit—allof us toyou; oryoutoallof us?—If you intend to yield atlaſtif you find you cannot conquer, yieldnow,and with a grace—for yield you muſt, or be none of our child. 

I wept. I knew not what to ſay; or rather how to expreſs what I had to ſay. 

Take notice, that there are flaws in your grandfather's will: Not a ſhilling of that eſtate will be yours, if you do not yield. Your grandfather left it to you, as a reward of your duty tohimand tous.—You willjuſtlyforfeit it, if— 

Permit me, good Madam, to ſay, that, if it wereunjuſtlybequeathed me, I ought not to wiſh to have it. But I hope Mr. Solmes will be apprized of theſe flaws. 

This was very pertly ſaid, ſhe was pleaſed to tell me: But bid me reflect, that the forfeiture of that eſtate, thro' my oppoſition, would be attended with the total loſs of my papa's favour; and then how deſtitute I muſt be; how unable to ſupport myſelf; and how many benevolent deſigns and good actions muſt I give up! 

I muſt accommodate myſelf, I ſaid, in the latter caſe, to my circumſtances:Muchonly wasrequiredwheremuchwasgiven.It became me to be thankful for what I had had: And I had reaſon to bleſs her and my good Mrs. Norton, for bringing me up to be ſatisfied with little—with much leſs, I would venture to ſay, than my papa's indulgence annually conferr'd upon me.—And then I thought of the old Roman and his lentiles. 

What perverſeneſs! ſaid my mamma.—But if you depend upon the favour of either or both your uncles, vain will be that dependence.Theywill give you up, I do aſſure you, if yourpapadoes, and abſolutely renounce you. 

I told her, I was ſorry that I had had ſo little merit, as to have made no deeper impreſſions of favour for me in their hearts: But that I would love and honour them as long as I lived. 

All this, ſhe was pleaſed to ſay, made my prepoſſeſſion in a certain man's favour the more evident. Indeed my brother and ſiſter could not go any-whither, but they heard of theſe prepoſſeſſions. 

It was a great grief to me, I ſaid, to be made the ſubject of the public talk: But I hop'd ſhe would have the goodneſs to excuſe me for obſerving, that the authors of my diſgrace within-doors, the talkers of my prepoſſeſſion without, and the reporters of it from abroad, were originally the ſame perſons. 

She ſeverely chid me for this. 

I received her rebukes in ſilence. 

You are ſullen, Clariſſa! I ſee you are ſullen!—And ſhe walked about the room in anger. Then turning to me—You canbearthe imputation, I ſee!—You have no concern to clear yourſelf of it. I was afraid of telling you all I was injoined to tell you, in caſe you were to be unperſuadeable:—But I find that I had a greater opinion of your delicacy and gentleneſs than I needed to have.—It cannot diſcompoſe ſo ſteady, ſo inflexible, a young creature, to be told, that the ſettlements are actually drawn; and that you will be called down, in a very few days, to hear them read, and to ſign them: for it is impoſſible, if your heart be free, that you can make the leaſt objection to them; except that they are ſo much in your favour, and in all our favour, be one. 

I was ſpeechleſs, abſolutely ſpeechleſs: Altho' my heart was ready to burſt, yet could I neither weep nor ſpeak. 

She was ſorry, ſhe ſaid, for my averſeneſs to this match(matchſhe was pleaſed to call it!): But there was no help. The honour and intereſt of the family, as my aunt had told me, and asſhehad told me, were concern'd; and I muſt comply. 

I was ſtill ſpeechleſs. 

She folded thewarm ſtatue,as ſhe was pleaſed to call me, in her arms; and intreated me, for God's ſake, and for her ſake, to comply. 

Speech and tears were lent me at the ſame time.—You have given me life, Madam, ſaid I, claſping my uplifted hands together, and falling on one knee; ahappy one, till now, hasyourgoodneſs, and mypapa's, made it! O do not, do not, make all the remainder of it miſerable! 

Your papa, reply'd ſhe, is reſolv'd he will not ſee you till he ſees you as obedient a child as you uſed to be. You have never been put to a teſt till now, that deſerv'd to be called a teſt. Thisis,Thismuſtbe, my laſt effort with you. Give me hope, my dear child: My peace is concerned: I will compound with you but forhope; and yet your father will not be ſatisfy'd without an implicit, and even a chearful obedience:—Give me but hope, my child! 

To give you hope, my deareſt, my moſt indulgent mamma, is to give you every thing. Can I be honeſt, if I give a hope that I cannot confirm? 

She was very angry. She again called me perverſe: She upbraided me with regarding only my own inclinations, and reſpecting not either her peace of mind, or my own duty:—'It was a grating thing, ſhe ſaid, for the parents of a child, who delighted in her in all the time of her helpleſs infancy, and throughout every ſtage of her childhood, and in every part of her education to womanhood, becauſe of the promiſes ſhe gave of proving the moſt grateful and dutiful of children; to find, that juſt when the time arrived which ſhould crown all their wiſhes, ſhe ſhould ſtand in the way of her own happineſs, and her parents comfort, and, refuſing an excellent offer, and noble ſettlements, give ſuſpicions to her anxious friends, that ſhe would become the property of a vile rake and libertine, who (be the occaſion what itwould) defy'd her family, and had actually embrued his hands in her brother's blood.' 

She added,'That ſhe had a very hard time of it between my father and me; That ſeeing my diſlike, ſhe had more than once pleaded for me; but all to no purpoſe. She was only treated as a too fond mother, who, from motives of a blameable indulgence;would encourage a child to ſtand in oppoſition to a father's will: She was charged, ſhe ſaid, with dividing the family into two parts; ſhe and her youngeſt daughter ſtanding againſt her huſband, his two brothers, her ſon, her eldeſt daughter, and her ſiſter Hervey. She had been told, that ſhe muſt be convinced of the fitneſs as well as advantage to the whole (my brother and Mr. Lovelace out of the queſtion) of carrying the contract with Mr. Solmes, on which ſomanycontracts depended, into execution.' 

She repeated,'That my father's heart was in it: That he had declared, he had rather have no daughter in me, than one he could not diſpoſe of for her own good: Eſpecially as I had owned, that myheart was free; and as the general good of his whole family was to be promoted by my obedience: That he had pleaded, that his frequent gouty paroxyſms (every Fit more threatening than the former) gave him no extraordinary proſpects either of worldly happineſs, or of long days: That he hoped, that I, who had been ſuppoſed to have contributed to the lengthening of hisfather's life, would not, by my diſobedience, ſhortenhis.' 

This was a moſt affecting plea, my dear; I wept in ſilence upon it; I could not ſpeak to it: And my mamma proceeded:'What therefore could behismotives, ſhe aſked, in the earneſt deſire he had to ſee this treaty perfected, but the welfare and aggrandizement of his family; which already having fortunes to become the higheſt condition, could not but aſpire to greater diſtinctions: That, however ſlight ſuch views as theſe might appear to me, I knew, that they were not ſlight ones to any other of the family: And my papa would be his own judge of what was, and what was not, likely to promote the good of his children: That my abſtractedneſs (affectation of abſtractedneſs ſome called it)ſavour'd of greater particularity, than what they aim'd to carry: That modeſty and humility would therefore oblige me rather to miſtruſt myſelf ofpeculiarity,than cenſure views, which all the world purſued, as opportunity offer'd.' 

I was ſtill ſilent; and ſhe proceeded—'That it was owing to the good opinion which my papa had of me, and of my prudence, duty, and gratitude, that he had engaged for my compliance, in my abſence (before I return'd from Miſs Howe); and had built and finiſhed contracts upon it, that could not be made void, or cancelled.' 

But why then, thought I, did they receive me, on my return from Miſs Howe, with ſo much intimidating ſolemnity?—To be ſure, this argument, as well as the reſt, was obtruded upon my mamma. 

She went on,'That my papa had declar'd, that my unexpected oppoſition (unexpected,ſhe was pleaſed to call it), and Mr. Lovelace's continued menaces and inſults, more and more convinc'd him, that a ſhort day was neceſſary, in order to put an end to all that man's hopes, and to his own apprehenſions reſulting from the diſobedience of a child ſo favour'd: That he had therefore actually order'd patterns of the richeſt ſilks to be ſent for from London— 

I ſtarted!—I was out of breath—I gaſped, at this frightful precipitance: I was going to open with warmth againſt it. I knew whoſe thehappyexpedient muſt be: Female minds, I once heard my brother ſay, that could but be brought tobalanceon the change of their ſtate, might eaſily bedeterminedby the glare and ſplendor of the nuptial preparations, and the pride of becoming the miſtreſs of a family.—But ſhe was pleaſed to hurry on, that I might not have time to expreſs my diſguſts at ſuch a communication—to this effect: 

'That neither for my ſake, nor his own, could my father labour under a ſuſpenſe ſo affecting tohis repoſe: That he had even thought fit to acquainther,on her pleading for me, that it became her, as ſhe valued her own peace (How harſh to ſuch a wife!), and as ſhe wiſhed, that he ſhould not ſuſpect that ſhe ſecretly favoured the addreſs of a vile rake (a character which all the ſex, he was pleaſed to ſay, virtuous and vicious, were but too fond of!), to exert her authority over me: And that This ſhe might the leſs ſcrupulouſly do, as I had own'd (the old ſtring!)that my heart was free.' 

Unworthy reflection This of our ſex's valuing a libertine, in my mamma's caſe, ſurely! who made choice of my papa in preference to ſeveral ſuitors of equal fortune, becauſe they were of inferior reputation for morals! 

She added,'That my papa had left her at going out, with this command, That if ſhe found that ſhe had not the proper influence over me, ſhe ſhould directly ſeparate herſelf from me; and leave me, ſingly, to take the conſequence of my double diſobedience.' 

She therefore intreated me in the moſt earneſt and condeſcending manner,'To ſignify to my papa, on his return, my ready obedience: And this, ſhe was pleaſed to ſay, as well forherſake, asmine.' 

Affected by my mamma's goodneſs to me, and by that part of her argument which related to her own peace, and to the ſuſpicions they had of her ſecretly inclining to prefer the man ſo hated bythem,to the man ſo muchmyaverſion, I could not but wiſh it were poſſible for me to obey. I therefore pauſed, heſitated, conſider'd, and was ſilent for a conſiderable ſpace. I could ſee, that my mamma hoped that the reſult of this heſitation would be favourable to her arguments. But then, recollecting, that all was owing to the inſtigations of a brother and ſiſter, wholly actuated by ſelfiſh and envious views: That I had not deſerved the treatment I had of late met with: That my diſgrace wasalreadybecome thepublic talk: That my averſion to their man was too generally known, to make my compliance either creditable to myſelf or to them; as it would demonſtrate leſs of duty than of a ſlaviſh, and even of a ſordid mind, ſeeking to preſerve its worldly fortunes; by the ſacrifice of its future happineſs; That it would give my brother and ſiſter a triumph over me, and over Mr. Lovelace, which they would not fail to glory in; and which, altho' it concern'd me but little to matter onhisaccount, yet might be attended with fatal miſchiefs—And then Mr. Solmes's diſagreeable perſon, his ſtill more diſagreeable manners; his low underſtanding—Underſtanding! the glory of a man! ſo little to be diſpenſed with in the head and director of a family, in order to preſerve to him that reſpect which a good wife (and that for the juſtification of her own choice) ſhould pay him herſelf, and wiſh every-body to pay him—And as Mr. Solmes'sinferiorityin this reſpectable faculty of the human mind (I muſt be allowed to ſay this to you, and no great ſelf-aſſumption neither) would proclaim to all future, as well as preſent obſervers, what muſt have been my mean inducement—All theſe reflections, which are ever preſent with me, crouding upon my remembrance; I would, Madam, ſaid I, folding my hands, with an earneſtneſs that my whole heart was ingaged in, bear the cruelleſt tortures, bear loſs of limb, and even of life, to giveyoupeace. But this man, every moment I would, at your command, think of him with favour, is the more my averſion. You cannot, indeed you cannot, think, how my whole ſoul reſiſts him!—And to talk of contracts, concluded upon; of patterns; of a ſhort day!—ſave me, ſave me, O my deareſt mamma, ſave your child, from this heavy, from this inſupportable evil!— 

Never was there a countenance that expreſs'd ſo ſignificantly, as my mamma's, an anguiſh, which ſhe ſtruggled to hide, under an anger ſhe was compelledto aſſume.—Till the latter overcoming the former, ſhe turned from me with an uplifted eye, and ſtamping—Strange perverſeneſs!were the only words I heard of a ſentence that ſhe angrily pronounced; and was going. I then, half franticly I believe, laid hold of her gown—Have patience with me, deareſt Madam! ſaid I—Do notyourenounce me totally!—If youmuſtſeparate yourſelf from your child, let it not be withabſolutereprobation onyour ownpart!—My uncles may be hard-hearted—My papa may be immoveable—I may ſuffer from my brother's ambition, and from my ſiſter's envy!—But let me not loſe my mamma's love; at leaſt, her pity. 

She turned to me with benigner rays—Youhavemy love! Youhavemypity!But, O my deareſt girl—I have notyours. 

Indeed, indeed, Madam, you have: And all my reverence, all my gratitude, you have!—But in thisonepoint—Cannot I be thisonceobliged?—Will noexpedientbe accepted? Have I not made a very fair propoſal as to the man ſo hated? 

I wiſh, for both our ſakes, my dear unperſuadable girl, that the deciſion of this point lay with me. But why, when you know it don't, ſhould you thus perplex and urge me?—To renounce Mr. Lovelace is now buthalfwhat is aimed at. Nor will any-body elſe believe you in earneſt in the offer, ifIwould. While you remain ſingle, Mr. Lovelace will have hopes—and you, in the opinion of others, inclinations. 

Permit me, deareſt Madam, to ſay, Thatyourgoodneſs to me,yourpatience,yourpeace, weigh more with me, than all the reſt put together: For altho' I am to be treated by my brother, and, thro' his inſtigations, by my papa, as a ſlave in this point, and not as a daughter, yet my mind is not that of a ſlave. You have not brought me up to be mean. 

So, Clary, you are already at defiance with yourpapa! I have had too much cauſe before toapprehendas much—What will this come to?—I,and then my dear mamma ſigh'd—I,am forced to put up with many humours— 

That you are, my ever-honour'd mamma, is my grief. And can it be thought that this very conſideration, and the apprehenſion of what may reſult from a muchworſe-temper'd man (a man, who has not half the ſenſe of my papa), has not made an impreſſion upon me, to the diſadvantage of the marry'd life? Yet 'tis ſomething of an alleviation, if one muſt bearunduecontroul, to bear it from a man of ſenſe. My papa, I have heard you ſay, Madam, was for years a very good-humour'd gentleman—Unobjectible in perſon and manners.—But the man propoſed to me— 

Forbear reflecting upon your papa (Did I, my dear, in what I have repeated, and I think they are the very words; reflect upon my papa?): It is not poſſible, I muſt ſay again, and again, were all menequallyindifferent to you, that you ſhould be thus ſturdy in your will.—I am tired out with your obſtinacy—The moſt unper-ſuade-able girl!—You forget, that I muſt ſeparate myſelf from you, if you will not comply: You do not remember that your papa will take you up, where I leave you.—Once more, however, I will put it to you,—Are you determin'd to brave your papa's diſpleaſure?—Are you determin'd to defy your uncles?—Will you chooſe to break with us all, rather than encourage Mr. Solmes?—Rather than give me hope? 

Cruel alternative!—But is not my ſincerity, is not the integrity of my heart, concerned in my anſwer? May not my everlaſting happineſs be the ſacrifice? Will not the leaſt ſhadow of thehopeyou juſt now demanded from me, be driven into abſolute and ſuddencertainty?Is it not ſought to inſnare, to intangle me in my own deſire of obeying, if I couldgive anſwers that might be conſtrued intohope?—Forgive me, Madam: Bear with your child's boldneſs in ſuch a cauſe as This!—Settlements drawn!—Patterns ſent for!—An early day!—Dear, dear Madam, how can I give hope, and not intend to be this man's? 

Ah, girl, never ſay yourheart is free!You deceive yourſelf if you think it is. 

Thus to be driven (and I wrung my hands thro' impatience) by the inſtigations of a deſigning, an ambitious brother, and by a ſiſter, that— 

How often, Clary, muſt I forbid your unſiſterly reflections?—Does not your father, do not your uncles, does not every-body, patronize Mr. Solmes?—And let me tell you, ungrateful girl, and unmoveable as ungrateful, let me repeatedly tell you, that it is evident to me, that nothing but a love unworthy of your prudence can make a creature late ſo dutiful, ſo ſturdy. You may gueſs what your father's firſt queſtion on his return will be. He muſt know, that I can do nothing with you. I have done my part. Seekme,if your mind change before he comes back: You have yet a little more time, as he ſtays ſupper: I will no more ſeekyou,nortoyou.—And away ſhe flung. 

What could I do but weep? 

I am extremely affected on my mamma's account—more, I muſt needs ſay, than on my own.—And indeed, all things conſider'd, and eſpecially, that the meaſure ſhe is engaged in, is (as I dare ſay it is) againſt her own judgment, ſhedeſervesmore compaſſion than myſelf.—Excellent woman! What pity, that meekneſs and condeſcenſion ſhould not be attended with the due rewards of thoſe charming graces!—Yet had ſhe not let violent ſpirits, as I have elſewhere obſerved with no ſmall regret, have found their power over hers, it could not have been thus. 

But here, run away with by my pen, I ſuffer my dear mamma to be angry with me on her own account. She hinted to me, indeed, that I muſt ſeekher,if mymindchanged; which is a condition that amounts to a prohibition:—But, as ſhe left me in diſpleaſure, will it not have a very obſtinate appearance, and look like a a kind of renunciation of her mediation in my favour, if I go not down to ſupplicate her pity, and her kind report, before my papa comes back?— 

I will attend her. I had rather all the world ſhould be angry with me, than my mamma! 

Mean time, to clear my hands from papers of ſuch a nature, Hannah ſhall depoſite this. If two or three letters reach you together, they will but expreſs, from one period to another, the anxieties and difficulties which the mind of your unhappy, but ever affectionate, friend labours under. 

CL. H.LETTER XXI. MiſsCLARISSA HARLOWE,To MiſsHOWE.
Sat. Night.I HAVE been down. Iamto be unlucky in all I do, I think, be my intention ever ſo good. I have made matters worſe inſtead of better; as I ſhall now tell you. 

I found my mamma and ſiſter together in my ſiſter's parlour. My mamma, I fear, by the glow in her fine face (and as the browner, ſullener glow in my ſiſter's confirm'd), had been expreſſing herſelf with warmth, againſt herunhappierchild: Perhaps giving ſuch an account of what had paſſed, as ſhould clear herſelf, and convince Bella, and thro'her,my brother and uncles, of the ſincere pains ſhe had taken with me!— 

I enter'd like a dejected criminal, I believe;—and beſought the favour of a private audience. My mamma's return, both looks and words, gave but too much reaſon for my ſurmize. 

You have, ſaid ſhe (looking at me with a ſternneſs that never ſits well on her ſweet features), rather arequeſtingthan aconcedingcountenance, Clariſſa Harlowe: If I am miſtaken, tell me ſo; and I will withdraw with you where-ever you will.—Yet, if ſo, or not ſo, you may ſay what you have to ſay before your ſiſter. 

My mamma, I thought, might have withdrawn with me, as ſhe knows, that I have not a friend in my ſiſter. 

I came down, I ſaid, to beg of her to forgive me for any-thing ſhe might have taken amiſs in what had paſſed above reſpecting herſelf; and to uſe her intereſt to ſoften my papa's diſpleaſure, when ſhe made the report ſhe was to make to him. 

Such aggravating looks; ſuch lifting-up of hands and eyes; ſuch a furrow'd forehead, in my ſiſter!— 

My mamma was angry enough without all that; and aſked me, To what purpoſe I came down, if I were ſtill ſo untractable? 

She had hardly ſpoke the words, when Shorey came in to tell her, that Mr. Solmes was in the hall, and deſired admittance. 

Ugly creature! What, at the cloſe of day, quite dark, brought him hither?—But, on ſecond thoughts. I believe it was contrived, that he ſhould be here at ſupper, to know the reſult of the conference between my mamma and me; and that my papa, on his return, might find us together. 

I was hurrying away; but my mamma commanded me, ſince I had come down only, as ſhe ſaid, to mock her, not to ſtir; and at the ſame time ſee if I could behave ſo to him, as might encourage her to make the report to my papa which I had ſo earneſtly beſought her to make. 

My ſiſter triumphed. I was vexed to be ſo caught, and to have ſuch an angry and cutting rebuke given me, with an aſpect more like the taunting ſiſter than the indulgent mother, if I may preſume to ſay ſo.—For my mamma herſelf ſeem'd to enjoy the ſurprize upon me. 

The man ſtalked in. His uſual walk is by pauſes, as if (from the ſame vacuity of thought which made Dryden's clown whiſtle) he was telling his ſteps: and firſt paid his clumſy reſpects to my mamma; then to my ſiſter; next to me, as if I were already his wife, and therefore to be laſt in his notice; and ſitting down by me, told us in general what weather it was. Very cold he made it; but I was warm enough. Then addreſſing himſelf to me; And how doyoufind it, Miſs, was his queſtion; and would have took my hand. 

I withdrew it, I believe with diſdain enough: My mamma frown'd; my ſiſter bit her lip. 

I could not contain myſelf: I never was ſo bold in my life; for I went on with my plea, as if Mr. Solmes had not been there. 

My mamma colour'd, and look'd at him, look'd at my ſiſter, and look'd at me. My ſiſter's eyes were opener and bigger than ever I ſaw them before. 

The man underſtood me. He hemm'd, and remov'd from one chair to another. 

I went on, ſupplicating for my mamma's favourable report: Nothing but invincible diſlike— 

What would the girl be at? Why, Clary!—Is this a ſubject!—Is this!—Is this!—Is this a time—And again ſhe look'd upon Mr. Solmes. 

I am ſorry, on reflection, that I put my mamma into ſo much confuſion.—To be ſure it was very ſaucy in me. 

I begg'd pardon. But my papa, I ſaid, would return. I ſhould have no other opportunity. I thought it was requiſite, ſince I was not permitted to withdraw, that Mr. Solmes's preſence ſhould not deprive me of an opportunity of ſuch importance for me to embrace; and at the ſame time, if he ſtill viſited on my account (looking at him), to ſhew, that it could not poſſibly be to any purpoſe. 

Is the girl mad? ſaid my mamma, interrupting me. 

My ſiſter, with the affectation of a whiſper to my mamma—This is—This isſpite,Madam (veryſpitefullyſhe ſpoke the word), becauſe you commanded her to ſtay. 

I only looked at her, and turning to my mamma, Permit me, Madam, ſaid I, to repeat my requeſt. I have no brother, no ſiſter!—If I loſe my mamma's favour, I am loſt for ever! 

Mr. Solmes removed to his firſt ſeat, and fell to gnawing the head of his hazel; a carved head, almoſt as ugly as his own. I did not think the man was ſoſenſible. 

My ſiſter roſe, with a face all over ſcarlet, and ſtepping to the table, where lay a fan, ſhe took it up, and, altho' Mr. Solmes had obſerv'd that the weather was cold, fann'd herſelf very violently. 

My mamma came to me, and angrily taking my hand, led me out of that parlour into my own; which, you know, is next to it—Is not this behaviour very bold, very provoking, think you, Clary? 

I beg your pardon, Madam, if it has that appearance to you. But indeed, my dear mamma, there ſeem to be ſnares laying for me. Too well I know my brother's drift. With a good word he ſhall have my conſent for all he wiſhes to worm me out of.—Neither he, nor my ſiſter, ſhall need to take half this pains.— 

My mamma was about to leave me in high diſpleaſure. 

I beſought her to ſtay: One favour, but one favour, deareſt Madam, ſaid I, give me leave to beg of you— 

What would the girl? 

I ſee how every thing is working about.—I never, never can think of Mr. Solmes. My papa will be in tumults, when he is told that I cannot. They will judge of the tenderneſs of your heart to a poor child who ſeems devoted by every-one elſe, from the willingneſs you have already ſhewn to hearken to myprayers. There will be endeavours uſed to confine me, and keep me out of your preſence, and out of the preſence of every one who uſed to love me—(This, my dear, is threaten'd)—If This be effected; if it be put out of my power to plead my own cauſe, and to appeal to You, and to my uncle Harlowe, of whom only I have hope;—then will every ear be open'd againſt me; and every tale encourag'd.—It is, therefore, my humble requeſt, That, added to the diſgraceful prohibitions I now ſuffer under, you will not, if you can help it, give way to my being deny'd your ear. 

Your liſtening Hannah has given you this intelligence, as ſhe does many others. 

My Hannah, Madam, liſtens not!—My Hannah— 

No more in her behalf—She is known to make miſchief—She is known—But no more of that buſy intermeddler—'Tis true, your father threaten'd to confine you to your chamber, if you comply'd not, in order the more aſſuredly to deprive you of the opportunity of correſponding with thoſe who harden your heart againſt his will. He bid me tell you ſo, when he went out, if I found you refractory. But I was loth to deliver ſo harſh a declaration; being ſtill in hope that you would come down to us in a compliant temper.—Hannah has overheard this, I ſuppoſe; and has told you of it; as alſo, that he declar'd he would break your heart, rather than you ſhould break his. And I now aſſure you, that you will be confin'd, and prohibited making teazing appeals to any of us: And we ſhall ſee who is to ſubmit, You, or every-bodytoyou! 

I offer'd to clear Hannah, and to lay the latter part of the intelligence to my ſiſter's echo, Betty Barnes, who had boaſted of it to another ſervant: But I was again bid to be ſilent on that head. I ſhould ſoon find, ſhe was pleaſed to ſay, thatotherscould be as determin'das I was obſtinate: And, once for all, would add, that ſince ſhe ſaw that I built upon her indulgence, and matter'd not involving her in contentions with my father, and his brothers, and her other children, ſhe would now aſſure me, that ſhe was as much determin'dagainſtMr. Lovelace, andforMr. Solmes and the family-ſchemes, as any-body; and would not refuſe her conſent to any meaſures that ſhould be thought neceſſary to reduce a ſtubborn child to her duty. 

I was ready to ſink. She was ſo good as to lend me her arm to ſupport me. 

And this is all I have to hope for from my mamma? 

It is. But, Clary, this one further opportunity I give you—Go in again to Mr. Solmes, and behave diſcreetly to him; and let your papa find you together, uponcivilterms at leaſt. 

My feet moved (of themſelves, I think) farther from the parlour where he was, and towards the ſtairs; and there I ſtopp'd and pauſed. 

If, proceeded ſhe, you are determin'd to ſtand in defiance of us all—then indeed may you go up to your chamber (as you are ready to do)—And God help you! 

God help me indeed! for I cannot give hope of what I cannot intend—But let me have your prayers, my dear mamma!—Thoſe ſhall have mine, who have brought me into all this diſtreſs! 

I was moving to go up— 

Andwillyou go up, Clary? 

I turn'd my face to her: My officious tears would needs plead for me: I could not juſt then ſpeak; and ſtood ſtill. 

Good girl, diſtreſs me not thus!—Dear, good girl, do not thus diſtreſs me!—holding out her hand; but ſtanding ſtill likewiſe— 

What can I do, Madam?—WhatcanI do?— 

Go in again, my child—Go in again, mydearchild!—repeated ſhe; and let your papa find you together!— 

What, Madam, to givehimhope?—To give hope to Mr. Solmes? 

Obſtinate, perverſe, undutiful Clariſſa Harlowe! with a rejecting hand, and angry aſpect; then take your own way, and go up!—But ſtir not down again, I charge you, without leave, or till your papa's pleaſure be known concerning you. 

She flung from me with high indignation: And I went up with a very heavy heart; and feet as ſlow as my heart was heavy. 

MY father is come home, and my brother with him. Late as it is, they are all ſhut up together. Not a door opens; not a ſoul ſtirs. Hannah, as ſhe moves up and down, is ſhunn'd as a perſon infected. 

THE angry aſſembly is broke up. My two uncles and my aunt Hervey are ſent for, it ſeems, to be here in the morning to breakfaſt. I ſhall then, I ſuppoſe, know my doom. 'Tis paſt eleven, and I am order'd not to go to bed. 

Twelve o' clock.THIS moment the keys of every thing are taken from me. It was propoſed to ſend for me down: But my papa ſaid, he could not bear to look upon me.—Strange alteration in a few weeks! Shorey was the meſſenger. The tears ſtood in her eyes when ſhe deliver'd her meſſage. 

You, my dear, are happy!—May you always be ſo!—And then I can never be wholly miſerable. Adieu, my beloved friend! 

CL. HARLOWE.LETTER XXII. MiſsCLARISSA HARLOWE,To MiſsHOWE.
Sunday morning, March 5.HANNAH has juſt brought me, from the private place in the garden-wall, a letter from Mr. Lovelace, depoſited laſt night, ſigned alſo by Lord M. 

He tells me in it,'That Mr. Solmes makes it his boaſt, that he is to be marry'd in a few days to one of the ſhyeſt women in England: That my brother explains his meaning to be me; aſſuring every-one, that his youngeſt ſiſter is very ſoon to be Mr. Solmes's wife. He tells me of the patterns beſpoke, which my mamma mention'd to me.' 

Not one thing eſcapes him that is done or ſaid in this houſe! 

'My ſiſter, he ſays, reports the ſame things; and that with ſuch particular aggravations of inſult uponhim,that he cannot but be extremely piqued, as well at the manner, as from the occaſion; and expreſſes himſelf with great violence upon it. 

'He knows not what my relations inducements can be, to prefer ſuch a man as Solmes to him. If advantageous ſettlements be the motive, Solmes ſhall not offer what he will refuſe to comply with. 

'As to his eſtate, or family; the firſt cannot be excepted againſt: And for the ſecond, he will not diſgrace himſelf by a compariſon ſo odious. He appeals to Lord M. for the regularity of his life and manners, ever ſince he has made his addreſſes to me, or had hope of my favour.' 

I ſuppoſe, he would have his Lordſhip's ſigning to this letter to be taken as a voucher for him. 

'He deſires my leave, in company with my Lord, in a pacific manner, to attend my father or uncles, in order to make propoſals that muſt be accepted, if they will but ſee him, and hear what they are:And tells me, that he will ſubmit to any meaſures that I ſhall preſcribe, in order to bring about a reconciliation.' 

He preſumes to be very earneſt with me'to give him a private meeting ſome night, in my father's garden, attended by whom I pleaſe.' 

Really, my dear, were you to ſee his letter, you would think I had given him great encouragement, and were in direct treaty with him; or that he were ſure that my friends would drive me into a foreign protection; for he has the boldneſs to offer, in my Lord's name, an aſylum to me, ſhould I be tyrannically treated in Solmes's behalf. 

I ſuppoſe it is the way of this ſex to endeavour to intangle the thoughtleſs of ours by bold ſuppoſals and offers, in hopes that we ſhall be too complaiſant or baſhful to quarrel with them; and, if not check'd, to reckon upon our ſilence, as aſſents voluntarily given, or conceſſions made in their favour. 

There are other particulars in this letter which I ought to mention to you: But I will take an opportunity to ſend you the letter itſelf, or a copy of it. 

For my own part, I am very uneaſy to think how I have beendrawnon one hand, anddrivenon the other, into a clandeſtine, in ſhort, into a mere Lover-like correſpondence, which my heart condemns. 

It is eaſy to ſee, that if I do not break it off, Mr. Lovelace's advantages, by reaſon of my unhappy ſituation, will every day increaſe, and I ſhall be more and more intangled: Yet if I do put an end to it, without making it a condition of being freed from Mr. Solmes's addreſs—May I, my dear, is it beſt, to continue it a little longer, in hopes, by giving him up, to extricate myſelf out of the other difficulty?—Whoſe advice can I now aſk but yours? 

All my relations are met. They are at breakfaſt together. Solmes is expected. I am exceſſively uneaſy. I muſt lay down my pen. 

THEY are all going to church together. Grievouſly diſorder'd they appear to be, as Hannah tells me. She believes ſomething is reſolved upon. 

Sunday noon.WHAT a cruel thing is ſuſpenſe!—I will aſk leave to go to church this afternoon. I expect to be deny'd: But if I do not aſk, they may allege, that my not going is owing to my ſelf. 

I deſired to ſpeak with Shorey: Shorey came: I directed her to carry my requeſt to my mamma, for permiſſion to go to church this afternoon. What think you was the return? Tell her, that ſhe muſt direct herſelf to her brother for any favour ſhe has to aſk.—So, my dear, I am to be deliver'd up to my brother!— 

I was reſolved, however, to aſk ofhimthis favour. Accordingly, when they ſent me up my ſolitary dinner, I gave the meſſenger a billet, in which I made it my humble requeſt to my papa, thro' him, to be permitted to go to church this afternoon. 

This was the contemptuous anſwer: Tell her, that her requeſt will be taken into conſiderationto-morrow.—My requeſt to go to churchto-dayto be taken into conſiderationto-morrow!— 

Patience will be the fitteſt return I can make to ſuch an inſult. But this method will not do, indeed it will not, with your Clariſſa Harlowe. And yet it is but the beginning, I ſuppoſe, of what I am to expect from my brother, now I am delivered up to him. 

ON recollection, I thought it beſt to renew my requeſt. I did. The following is a copy of what I wrote, and what follows that, of the anſwer ſent me.SIR,I KNOW not what to make of the anſwer brought to my requeſt of being permitted to go to church this afternoon. If you deſigned to ſhew your pleaſantry by it, I hope that will continue; and then my requeſt will be granted. You know, that I never abſented myſelf, when well, and at home, till the two laſt Sundays; when I wasadviſednot to go. My preſent ſituation is ſuch, that I never more wanted the benefit of the public prayers. I will ſolemnly engage only to go thither, and back again. I hope it cannot be thought that I would do otherwiſe. My dejection of ſpirits will give a too juſt excuſe on the ſcore of indiſpoſition, for avoiding viſits. Nor will I, but by diſtant civilities, return the compliments of any of my acquaintance. My diſgraces, if they are to have an end, need not to be proclaim'd to the whole world. I aſk this favour, therefore, for my reputation's ſake, that I may be able to hold up my head in the neighbourhood, if I live to ſee an end of the unmerited ſeverities, which ſeem to be deſigned for 

Your unhappy ſiſter, CL. HARLOWE.To MiſsCLARISSA HARLOWE.
FOR a girl to lay ſo much ſtreſs upon going to church, and yet reſolve to defy her parents, in an article of the greateſt conſequence to them, and to the whole family, is an abſurdity. You are recommended, Miſs, to the practice of yourprivatedevotions: Maytheybe efficacious upon the mind of one of the moſt pervicacious young creatures that ever was heard of! The in-ten-tion is, I tell you plainly, to mortify you into a ſenſe of your duty. The neighbours you are ſo ſollicitous to appear well with, already know, that you defythat.So, Miſs, if you have areal value for your reputation, ſhew it as you ought. It is yet in your own power to eſtabliſh or impair it. 

JA. HARLOWE.Thus, my dear, has my brother got me into his ſnares, and I, like a poor ſilly bird, the more I ſtruggle, am the more intangled. 

 

LETTER XXIII. MiſsCLARISSA HARLOWE,To MiſsHOWE.
Mond. morning, Mar. 6.THEY are reſolv'd to break my heart. My poor Hannah is diſcharged—diſgracefully diſcharged!—Thus it was. 

Half an hour after I had ſent the poor girl down for my breakfaſt, that bold creature Betty Barnes, my ſiſter's confident and ſervant (if a favourite maid and confident can be deemed aſervant), came up. 

What, Miſs, will you pleaſe to have for breakfaſt? 

I was ſurpris'd. What will I have for breakfaſt, Betty!—How!—What!—How comes it!—Then I named Hannah!—I could not tell what to ſay. 

Don't be ſurpris'd, Miſs:—But you'll ſee Hannah no more in this houſe!— 

God forbid!—Is any harm come to Hannah!—What! What is the matter with Hannah?— 

Why, Miſs, the ſhort and the long is this: Your papa and mamma think Hannah has ſtaid long enough in the houſe to do miſchief; and ſo ſhe is order'd totroop(that was the confident creature's word); and I am directed to wait upon you. 

I burſt into tears:—I have no ſervice for you, Betty Barnes, none at all.—But where is Hannah?—Cannot I ſpeak with the poor girl. I owe her half a year's wages. May I not ſee the honeſt creature, and pay her her wages?—I may never ſee her again perhaps, for they are reſolv'd to break my heart. 

And they think, you are reſolv'd to break theirs: So tit for tat, Miſs. 

Impertinent I call'd her; and aſk'd her, if it were upon ſuch confident terms that her ſervice was to commence. 

I was ſo very earneſt to ſee the poor maid, that, to oblige me, as ſhe ſaid, ſhe went down with my requeſt. 

The worthy creature was as earneſt to ſee me; and the favour was granted in preſence of Shorey and Betty. 

I thank'd her, when ſhe came up, for her paſt ſervice to me. 

Her heart was ready to break. And ſhe fell a vindicating her fidelity and love; and diſclaiming any miſchief ſhe had ever made. 

I told her, that thoſe, who occaſion'd her being turn'd out of my ſervice, made no queſtion of her integrity: That it was an indignity level'd at me: That I was very ſorry for it, and hoped ſhe would meet with as good a ſervice. 

Never, never, wringing her hands, a miſtreſs ſhe loved ſo well. And the poor creature ran on in my praiſes, and in profeſſions of love to me. 

We are all apt, you know, my dear, to praiſe our benefactors, becauſe theyareour benefactors; as if every-body did right or wrong as they obliged or diſobligedus.But this good creaturedeſervedto be kindly treated; ſo I could have no merit in favouring one, whom it would have been ingrateful not to diſtinguiſh. 

I gave her a little linen, ſome laces, and other odd things; and, inſtead of four pounds which were due to her, ten guineas: And ſaid, If ever I were again allow'd to be my own miſtreſs, I would think ofherin the firſt place. 

Betty enviouſly whiſper'd Shorey upon it. 

Hannah told me, before their faces, having no otheropportunity, that ſhe had been examin'd about letterstome, andfromme: And that ſhe had given her pockets to Miſs Harlowe, who look'd into them, and put her fingers in her ſtays; to ſatisfy herſelf that ſhe had not any. 

She gave me an account of the number of my pheaſants and bantams; and I ſaid, they ſhould be my own care twice or thrice a day. 

We wept over each other at parting. The girl pray'd for all the family. 

To have ſo good a ſervant ſo diſgracefully diſmiſſed, is a cutting thing: And I could not help ſaying, That theſe methods might break my heart, but not any other way anſwer the end of the authors of my diſgraces. 

Betty, with a very ſaucy fleer, ſaid to Shorey, There would be a trial of ſkill about that, ſhe fancy'd. But I took no notice of it. If this wench thinks I have robbed her young miſtreſs of a lover, as you ſay ſhe has given out, ſhe may think it a merit in herſelf to be impertinent to me. 

Thus have I been forced to part with my faithful Hannah. If you can commend the good creature to a place worthy of her, pray do, for my ſake. 

LETTER XXIV. MiſsCLARISSA HARLOWE,To MiſsHOWE.
Mond. near 12 o'Clock.THE incloſed Letter is juſt now delivered to me. My brother has now carried all his points. 

I ſend you alſo the copy of my anſwer. No more at this time can I write. 

Mond. March 6.MiſsCLARY,BY your papa's and mamma's command, I write, expreſly to forbid you to come into their preſence,or into the garden when they are there: Nor when they arenotthere, but with Betty Barnes to attend you, except by particular licence or command. 

On their bleſſings, you are forbidden likewiſe to correſpond with the vile Lovelace; as it is well known you did by means of your ſly Hannah: Whence her ſudden diſcharge: As was fit. 

Neither are you to correſpond with Miſs Howe; who has given herſelf high airs of late; and might poſſibly help on your correſpondence with that libertine. Nor, in ſhort, with any-body without leave. 

You are not to enter into the preſence of either of your uncles, without their leave firſt obtained. It is in mercy to you, after ſuch a behaviour to your mamma, that your papa refuſes to ſee you. 

You are not to be ſeen in any apartment of the houſe, you ſo lately govern'd as you pleaſed, unleſs you are commanded down. 

In ſhort, are ſtrictly to confine yourſelf to your chamber, except now and then, in Betty Barnes's ſight (as aforeſaid) you take a morning and evening turn in the garden: And then you are to go directly, and without ſtopping at any apartment in the way, up and down the back-ſtairs, that the ſight of ſo perverſe a young creature may not add to the pain you have given every-body. 

The hourly threatenings of your Lovelace, as well as your own unheard-of obſtinacy, will account to you for all this. What a hand has the beſt and moſt indulgent of mothers had with you, who ſo long pleaded for you, and undertook for you; even when others, from the manner of your ſetting out, deſpaired of moving you!—What muſt your perverſeneſs have been, thatſucha mother can give you up! She thinks it right ſo to do: Nor will take you to favour, unleſs you make the firſt ſteps, by a compliance with your duty. 

As for myſelf, whom, perhaps, you think hardlyof (in very good company, if you do, that is my conſolation); I have adviſed, that you may be permitted to purſue your own inclinations [Some people need no greater puniſhment than ſuch a permiſſion]; and not to have the houſe incumbered by one who muſt give them the more pain for the neceſſity ſhe has laid them under of avoiding the ſight of her, altho' in it. 

If any thing I have written, appear ſevere or harſh, it is ſtill in your power (but perhaps, will not always be ſo) to remedy it; and that by a ſingle word. 

Betty Barnes has orders to obey you in all points conſiſtent with her duty to thoſe to whomyouowe it, as well asſhe. 

JA. HARLOWE.ToJAMES HARLOWEjunior,Eſq
SIR,I WILL only ſay, That you may congratulate yourſelf on havingſo farſucceeded in all your views, that you may report what you pleaſe of me, and I can no more defend myſelf, than if I were dead. Yet one favour, nevertheleſs, I will beg of you: It is this;—That you will not occaſion more ſeverities, more diſgraces, than are neceſſary for carrying into execution your further deſigns, whatever they be, againſt 

Your unhappy Siſter, CL. HARLOWE.LETTER XXV. MiſsCLARISSA HARLOWE,To MiſsHOWE.
Tueſ. March 7.BY my laſt depoſite, you'll ſee how I am driven, and what a poor priſoner I am: No regard had to my reputation. The whole matter is now before you. Canſuchmeaſures be ſuppoſed to ſoften?—Butſurely they can only mean to try to frighten me into my brother's views.—All my hope is, to be able to weather this point till my couſin Morden comes from Florence; and he is expected ſoon. Yet, if they are determined upon a ſhort day, I doubt he will not be here time enough to ſave me. 

It is plain, by my brother's letter, that my mamma has not ſpared me, in the report ſhe has made of the conferences between herſelf and me: Yet ſhe was pleaſed to hint to me, that my brother had views which ſhe would have had me try to diſappoint.—But ſhe had engaged to give afaithfulaccount of what was to paſs between herſelf and me: And it was doubtleſs, much more eligible to give up a daughter, than to diſoblige a huſband, and every other perſon of the family. 

They think they have done every-thing by turning away my poor Hannah: But as long as the liberty of the garden, and my poultry-viſits are allowed me, they will be miſtaken. 

I aſkedMrs. Betty,If ſhe had any orders to watch or attend me? or, Whether I were to aſkherLeave, whenever I ſhould be diſpoſed to walk in the garden, or to go to feed my Bantams? 

Lord bleſs her! what could I mean by ſuch a queſtion!—Yet ſhe owned, that ſhe had heard, that I was not to walk in the garden when my papa, mamma, or uncles were there. 

However, as it behoved me to be aſſured on this head, I went down directly, and ſtaid an hour, without queſtion or impediment: And yet a good part of the time, I walked under, and inſight(as I may ſay) of, my brother's Study-window; where both he and my ſiſter happened to be. And I am ſure they ſaw me, by the loud mirth they affected; by way of inſult, as I ſuppoſe. 

So this part of my reſtraint was doubtleſs a ſtretch of the authority given him. The inforcing of that may perhaps come next. But I hope not. 

Tueſday night.SINCE I wrote the above, I have ventured to ſend a letter by Shorey, to my mamma. I directed her to give it into her own hand, when nobody was by. 

I ſhall incloſe the copy of it. You'll ſee that I would have it thought, that now Hannah is gone, I have no way to correſpond out of the houſe. I am far from thinking all I do, right. I am afraid, this is a little piece of art, that isnotſo. But this is an after-thought: The letter went firſt. 

Honoured Madam,HAVING acknowleged to you, that I had received letters from Mr. Lovelace, full of reſentment, and that I anſwered them purely to prevent further miſchief; and having ſhew'd you copies of my anſwers, which you did not diſapprove of, altho' you thought fit, after you had read them, to forbid me any further correſpondence with him; I think it my duty to acquaint you, that another letter from him has ſince come to my hand, in which he is very earneſt with me to permit him to wait on my papa, or you, or my two uncles, in a pacific way, accompanied by Lord M.—On which I beg your commands. 

I own to you, Madam, that had not the prohibition been renew'd, and had not Hannah been ſo ſuddenly diſmiſſed my ſervice, I ſhould have made the leſs ſcruple to have written an anſwer, and to have commanded her to convey it to him with all ſpeed, in order to diſſuade him from theſe viſits, leſt any thing ſhould happen on the occaſion, that my heart akes but to think of. 

And here, I cannot but expreſs my grief, that I ſhould have all the puniſhment, and all the blame, who, as I have reaſon to think, have prevented great miſchief, and have not been the occaſion of any. For, Madam, couldIbe ſuppoſed to govern the paſſions ofeitherof the gentlemen?—Over the one indeed,I have had ſome little influence, without giving him hitherto any reaſon to think he has faſten'd an obligation upon me for it.—Over the other, Who, Madam, has any? 

I am grieved at heart, to be obliged to lay ſo great blame at my brother's door, altho' my reputation and my liberty are both to be ſacrific'd to his reſentment and ambition. May not, however, ſo deep a ſufferer be permitted to ſpeak out? 

This communication being as voluntarily made, as dutifully intended; I humbly preſume to hope, that I ſhall not be required to produce the letter itſelf. I cannot either in honour or prudence do that, becauſe of the vehemence of his ſtyle; for having heard [not, I aſſure you, by my means, or thro' Hannah's] of ſome part of the harſh treatment I have met with; he thinks himſelf intitled to place it to his own account, by reaſon of ſpeeches thrown out by ſome of my relations equally vehement. 

If I donotanſwer him, he will be made deſperate, and think himſelf juſtified [tho' I ſhall not think him ſo] in reſenting the treatment he complains of: If Ido,and if, in compliment to me, he forbears to reſent what he thinks himſelf intitled to reſent; be pleaſed, Madam, to conſider the obligation he will ſuppoſe he lays me under. 

If I were as ſtrongly prepoſſeſſed in his favour as is ſuppoſed, I ſhould not have wiſh'd this to be conſider'd by you.—And permit me, as a ſtill further proof that I amnotprepoſſeſſed, to beg of you to conſider, Whether, upon the whole, the propoſal I made of declareing for the Single Life (which I will religiouſly adhere to) is not the beſt way, to get rid of his pretenſions with honour. To renounce him, and not to be allowed to aver, that I will never be the other man's, will make him conclude (driven as I am driven), that I am determined in that other man's favour. 

If this has not its due weight, my brother's ſtrangeſchemes muſt be try'd, and I will reſign myſelf to my deſtiny, with all the acquieſcence that ſhall be granted to my prayers. And ſo leaving the whole to your own wiſdom, and whether you chooſe to conſult my papa and uncles upon this humble application, or not; or whether I ſhall be allowed to write an anſwer to Mr. Lovelace, or not (and if allow'd ſo to do, I beg your direction, by whom to ſend it); I remain, 

Honoured Madam, Your unhappy, but ever-dutiful daughter, CL. HARLOWE.Wedneſday morning.I have juſt received an anſwer to the incloſed letter. My mamma, you'll obſerve, has ordered me to burn it: But, as you will have it in your ſafe keeping, and nobody elſe will ſee it, her end will be equally anſwer'd. It has neither date nor ſuperſcription.CLARISSA,SAY not all the blame, and all the puniſhment, is yours. I am as much blam'd, and as much puniſh'd, as you are; yet am more innocent. When your obſtinacy is equal to any other perſon's paſſion, blame not your brother. We judg'd right, that Hannah carry'd on your correſpondencies. Now ſhe is gone, and you cannot write (wethinkyou cannot) to Miſs Howe, nor ſhe to you, without our knowlege, one cauſe of uneaſineſs and jealouſy is over. 

I had no diſlike to Hannah. I did not tell her ſo; becauſe Somebody was within hearing, when ſhe deſired to pay her duty to me at going: I gave her a caution, in a raiſed voice, To take care, where-ever ſhe went to live next, if there were any young Ladies, how ſhe made parties, and aſſiſted in clandeſtine correſpondencies:—But I ſlid two guineas into her hand.Nor was I angry to hear you weremorebountiful to her—So much for Hannah. 

I don't know what to write, about your anſw••ing that man of violence. What can you think of it, that ſuch a family as ours, ſhould have ſuch a rod held over it?—For my part, I have not own'd that I know youhavecorreſponded: By your laſt boldneſs to me (an aſtoniſhing one it was, to purſue before Mr. Solmes, the ſubject that I was forced to break from above ſtairs) you may, as far as I know, plead, that you had my countenance for your correſpondence with him; and ſo add to the uneaſineſs between your papa and me. You was once all my comfort: You made all my hardſhips tolerable:—But now!—However, nothing, it is plain, can move you; and I will ſay no more on that head: For you are under your papa's diſcipline now; and he will neither be preſcribed to, nor intreated. 

I ſhould have been glad to ſee the letter you tell me of, as I ſaw the reſt:—You ſay, both honour and prudence forbid you to ſhew it me!—O Clariſſa! what think you of receiving letters that honour and prudence forbid you to ſhew to a mother!—But it is not for me to ſee it, if you wouldchooſeto ſhew it me. I will not be in your ſecret. I will not know that you did correſpond. And, as to an anſwer, take your own methods. But let him know it will be the laſt you will write. And, if you do write, I won't ſee it: So ſeal it up, if you do, and give it to Shorey, and ſhe—Yet do not think I give you licence to write! 

We will be upon no conditions with him, nor willyoube allow'd to be upon any. Your papa and uncles would have no patience were he to come. What haveyouto do to oblige him with your refuſal of Mr. Solmes?—Will not That refuſal be to givehimhope? And while he has any, canwebe eaſy or free from his inſults? Were even your brother infault,asthat fault cannot be conquer'd, is a ſiſter to carry on a correſpondence that ſhall endanger her brother? But your papa has given his ſanction to your brother's diſlikes, and they are now your papa's diſlikes, and my diſlikes, your uncles and every-body's!—No matter towhomowing. 

As to the reſt, you have by your obſtinacy put it out of my power to do any-thing for you. Your papa takes upon himſelf to be anſwerable for all conſequences. You muſt not therefore apply to me for any favour. I ſhall endeavour to be only an obſerver; Happy, if I could be an unconcerned one!—While I had power, you would not let me uſe it as Iwouldhave uſed it. Your aunt has been forced to engage not to interfere but by your papa's direction. You'll have ſevere trials. If you have any favour to hope for, it muſt be from the mediation of your uncles. And yet I believe, they are equally determin'd: For they make it a principle—(Alas! they never had children!) that that child, who in marriage is not govern'd by her parents, is to be given up as a loſt creature! 

I charge you, let not this letter be found. Burn it. There is too much of themotherin it, to a daughter ſo unaccountably obſtinate. 

Write not another letter to me, I can do nothing for you. But you can do every thing for yourſelf. 

Now, my dear, to proceed with my melancholy narrative. 

After this letter, you will believe, that I could have very little hopes, that an application directly to my father, would ſtand me in any ſtead: But I thought it became me to write, were it but to acquit myſelftomyſelf, that I have left nothing unattempted, that has the leaſt likelihood to reſtore me to his favour. Accordingly I wrote to the following effect: 

'I preſume not, I ſay, to argue with my papa, Ionly beg his mercy and indulgence in thisonepoint, on which depends my preſent and perhaps myfuturehappineſs; and beſeech him not to reprobate his child for an averſion which it is not in her power to conquer. I beg, that I may not be ſacrific'd to projects, and remote contingencies: I complain of the diſgraces I ſuffer in this baniſhment from his preſence, and in being confined to my chamber. In every thing but thisonepoint, I promiſe implicit duty and reſignation to his will. I repeat my offers of a Single Life; and appeal to him, whether I have ever given him cauſe to doubt my word. I beg to be admitted to his, and to my mamma's preſence, and that my conduct may•e under their own eye: And this with the more earneſtneſs, as I have too much reaſon to believe, that ſnares are laid for me; and tauntings and revilings uſed, on purpoſe to make a handle of my words againſt me, when I am not permitted to ſpeak in my own defence. I conclude with hoping, that my brother's inſtigations may not rob an unhappy child of her father.' 

 

This is the cruel anſwer, ſent without ſuperſcription, and unſealed, altho' by Betty Barnes, who delivered it with an air, as if ſhe knew the contents. 

Wedneſday.I Write, perverſe girl, but with all the indignation that your diſobedience deſerves. To deſire to be forgiven a fault you own, and yet reſolve to perſevere in, is a boldneſs, no more to be equall'd, than paſſed over. It ismyauthority you defy. Your reflections upon a brother, that is an honour to us all, deſerve my utmoſt reſentment. I ſee how light all relationſhip ſits uponyou.ThecauſeI gueſs at, too: I cannot bear the reflections that naturally ariſe from this conſideration. Your behaviour to your too indulgent, and too fond mother—But, I have no patience—Continue baniſhed from my preſence, undutiful as you are, till you know how to conform to my will. Ingrateful creature! Your letter but upbraids me for my paſt indulgence. Write no more to me, till you can diſtinguiſh better; and till you are convinc'd of your duty to 

A juſtly incenſed Father.This angry letter was accompany'd with one from my mamma, unſealed, and unſuperſcribed alſo. Thoſe who take ſo much pains to confederate every one againſt me, I make no doubt, obliged her to bear her teſtimony againſt the poor girl. 

This letter being a repetition of ſome of the ſevere things that paſſed between my mamma and me, of which I have given you an account, I ſhall not need to give you the contents—Only thus far, thatſhealſo praiſes my brother, and blames me for my freedoms with him. 

LETTER XXVI. MiſsCLARISSA HARLOWE,To MiſsHOWE.
Thurſd. morn. Mar. 9.I Have another letter from Mr. Lovelace, altho' I had not anſwer'd his former. 

This man, ſome how or other, knows every thing that paſſes in our family: My confinement; Hannah's diſmiſſion; and more of the reſentments and reſolutions of my father, uncles, and brother, than I can poſſibly know, and almoſt as ſoon as things happen. He cannot come at theſe intelligences fairly. 

He is exceſſively uneaſy upon what he hears; and his expreſſions both of love to me, and reſentment to them, are very fervent. He ſollicits me much'To engage my honour to him, Never to have Mr.Solmes.'I think I may fairly promiſe him that I will not. 

He begs,'That I will not think he is endeavouring to make to himſelf ameritat any man's expence, ſince he hopes to obtain my favour on the foot of hisown; nor that he ſeeks tointimidateme into a conſideration for him. But declares, that the treatment he meets with from my family is ſo intolerable, that he is perpetually reproached for not reſenting it; and that as well by Lord M. and his two aunts, as by all his other friends: And if he muſt have no hope from me, he cannot anſwer for what his deſpair will make him do.' 

Indeed, he ſays, his relations, the Ladies particularly, adviſe him to have recourſe to alegalremedy:'But how, he aſks, can a man of honour go to law for verbal abuſes, given by people intitled to wear ſwords?' 

You ſee, my dear, that my mamma ſeems as apprehenſive of miſchief as I, and has indirectly offer'd to let Shorey carry my anſwer to the letter he ſent me before. 

He is full of the favour of the Ladies of his family to me: To whom, nevertheleſs, I am perſonally a ſtranger; except, that once I ſaw Miſs Patty Montague at Mrs. Knollys's. 

It is natural, I believe, for a perſon to be the more deſirous of making new friends, in proportion as ſhe loſes the favour of old ones: Yet, had I rather appear amiable in the eyes of my own relations, and in your eyes, than in thoſe of all the world beſides:—But theſe four Ladies of his family have ſuch excellent characters, that one cannot but wiſh to be thought well of by them. Cannot there be a way to find out by Mrs. Forteſcue's means, or by Mr. Hickman, who has ſome knowlege of Lord M. (covertly, however), what their opinions are of the preſent ſituation of things in our family; and of the little likelihood thereis, that ever the alliance once approved of by them, can take effect?—I cannot, for my own part, think ſo well of myſelf, as to imagine, that they can wiſh him to perſevere in his views with regard to me, through ſuch contempts and diſcouragements—Not that it would concern me, ſhould they adviſe him to the contrary.—By my Lord's ſigning Mr. Lovelace's former letter; by Mr. Lovelace's aſſurances of the continued favour of all his relations; and by the report of others; I ſeem to ſtand ſtill high in their favour: But, methinks, I would be glad to have this confirmed to me, as from themſelves, by the lips of an indifferent perſon; and the rather, as they are known to put a value upon their alliance, fortunes, and family; and take it amiſs, as they have reaſon, to be included byoursin the contempt thrown upon their kinſman. 

Curioſity at preſent is all my motive: Nor will there ever, I hope, be a ſtronger, notwithſtanding your queſtionablethrobs:Even were Mr. Lovelace to be leſs exceptionable than he is. 

I have anſwer'd his letters. If he take me at my word, I ſhall need to be the leſs ſollicitous for his relations opinions in my favour: And yet one would be glad to be well thought of by the worthy. This is the ſubſtance of my letter: 

'I expreſs my ſurprize at his knowing (and ſo early) all that paſſes here. I aſſure him, That were there not ſuch a man in the world, as himſelf, I would not have Mr. Solmes.' 

I tell him,'That to return, as I underſtand he does, defiances for defiances, to my relations, is far from being a proof with me, either of his politeneſs, or of the conſideration he pretends to have for me. 

'That the moment I hear he viſits any of my friends without their conſent, I will make a reſolution, never to ſee him more, if I can help it.' 

I appriſe him,'That I am conniv'd at in ſending〈1 page duplicate〉〈1 page duplicate〉this letter (altho' no one has ſeen the contents), provided it ſhall be the laſt I will ever write to him: That I had more than once told him, that the Single Life was my choice: And this, before Mr. Solmes was introduced as a viſitor in our family: That Mr. Wyerley, and other gentlemen, knew it well to be my choice, beforehewas acquainted with any of us: That I had never been induced to receive a line from him on the ſubject, but that I thought he had not acted ungenerouſly by my brother; and yet had not been ſo handſomely treated by my friends, as he might have expected: That had he even my friends of his ſide, I ſhould have very great objections to him, were I to get over my choice of a Single Life, ſo really preferable to me as it is; and that I ſhould have declared as much to him, had I reg•rded him as more than a common viſitor. On all theſe accounts, I deſire, that the one more letter which I will allow him to depoſite in the uſual place, may be the verylaſt; and That only, to acquaint me with his acquieſcence, that it ſhall be ſo; at leaſt till happier times!' 

This laſt I put in, that he may not he quite deſperate. But if he take me at my word, I ſhall be rid of one of my tormentors. 

I have promiſed to lay before you all his letters, and my anſwers: I repeat that promiſe: And am the leſs ſollicitous for that reaſon, to amplify upon the contents of either. But I cannot too often expreſs my vexation, to be driven to ſuch ſtreights and difficulties, here at home, as oblige me to anſwer letters (from a man I had not abſolutely intended to encourage, and had really great objections to) filled ashisare with ſuch warm proteſtations, and written to me with a ſpirit of expectation. 

For, my dear, you never knew ſo bold a ſuppoſer. As commentators find beauties in an author, which the author perhaps was a ſtranger to; ſo he ſometimes compliments me in high ſtrains of gratitude, forfavours, and for a conſideration, which I never deſigned him; inſomuch that I am frequently under a neceſſity of explaining away the attributed goodneſs, which if I ſhew'd him, I ſhould have the leſs opinion of myſelf. 

In ſhort, my dear, like a reſtiff horſe, he pains one's hands, and half disjoints one's arms, to rein him in. And, when you ſee his letters, you muſt form no judgment upon them, till you have read my anſwers: If you do, you will indeed think you have cauſe to attributeſelf-deceit,andthrobs,andglowsto your friend:—And yet, at other times, the contradictory creature complains, that I ſhew him as little favour, and my friends as much inveteracy, as if in the rencounter betwixt my brother and him, he had been the aggreſſor; and as if the cataſtrophe had been as fatal, as it might have been. 

If he has a deſign by this conduct (ſometimes complaining of my ſhyneſs, at others exulting in my imaginary favours) to induce me at one time to acquieſce with his compliments, at another to be more complaiſant for his complaints; and if the contradiction be not the effect of his inattention and giddineſs; I ſhall think him as deep and as artful (too probably, aspractiſed) a creature, as ever lived; and were I to be ſure of it, ſhould hate him, if poſſible, worſe than I do Solmes. 

But enough for the preſent of a creature ſo very various!— 

LETTER XXVII. MiſsHOWE,To MiſsCLARISSA HARLOWE.
Thurſday night, March 9.I Have no patience with any of the people you are with. I know not what to adviſe you to do. How do you know, that you are not puniſhable forbeing the cauſe, tho' to your own loſs, that the will of your grandfather is not comply'd with?—Wills are ſacred things, child. You ſee, that they, eventhey,think ſo, who imagine they ſuffer by a will, thro' the diſtinction paid you in it. 

I allow of all your noble reaſonings for what you did at the time: But ſince ſuch a charming, ſuch a generous inſtance of filial duty, is to go thus unrewarded; Why ſhould you not reſume? 

Your grandfather knew the family-failing: He knew what a noble ſpirit you had to do good.—He himſelf, perhaps (excuſe me, my dear), had done too little in his life-time; and therefore he put it in your power to make up for the defects of the whole family. Were it to me, I would reſume it. Indeed I would. 

You will ſay, you cannot do it, while you are with them. I don't know that. Do you think they can uſe you worſe than they do?—And is it not yourright?And do they not make uſe of your own generoſity to oppreſs you? Your uncle Harlowe is one truſtee, your couſin Morden is the other: Inſiſt upon your right to your uncle; and write to your couſin Morden about it. This, I dare ſay, will make them alter their behaviour to you. 

Your inſolent brother, what hasheto do to controul you?—Were it me (I wiſh it were for one month, and no more), I'd ſhew him the difference. I'd be in my own manſion, purſuing my charming ſchemes, and making all around me happy. I'd ſet up my own chariot. I'd viſit them when they deſerv'd it. But when my brother and ſiſter gave themſelves airs, I'd let them know, that I was their ſiſter, and not their ſervant: And, if that did not do, I would ſhut my gates againſt them; and bid them be company for each other.— 

It muſt be confeſs'd, however, that this brother and ſiſter of yours, judging as ſuch narrow ſpirits willever judge, have ſome reaſon for treating you as they do. It muſt have long been a mortifying conſideration to them (ſet diſappointed love on her ſide, and avarice on his, out of the queſtion) to be ſo much eclipſed by a younger ſiſter.—Such a ſun in a family, where there are none but faint twinklers, How could they bear it!—Why, my dear, they muſt look upon you as a prodigy among them: And prodigies, you know, tho' they obtain our admiration, never attract our love. The diſtance between you and them is immenſe. Their eyes ake to look up at you. What ſhades does your full day of merit caſt upon them!—Can you wonder then, that they ſhould embrace the firſt opportunity that offer'd, to endeavour to bring you down to their level? 

Depend upon it, my dear, you will have more of it, and more ſtill, as you bear it. 

As to this odious Solmes, I wonder not at your averſion to him. It is needleſs to ſay any thing to you, who have ſo ſincere an antipathy to him, to ſtrengthen your diſlike: Yet, who can reſiſt her own talents? One of mine, as I have heretofore ſaid, is to give an ugly likeneſs. Shall I indulge it?—I will. And the rather, as, in doing ſo, you will have my opinion in juſtification of your averſion to him, and in approbation of a ſteadineſs, that I ever admired, and muſt for ever approve in your temper. 

I was twice in this wretch's company. At one of the times your Lovelace was there. I need not mention to you, who have ſuch apretty curioſity,tho' at preſent,onlya curioſity, you know! the unſpeakable difference!— 

Lovelace entertain'd the company in his lively gay way, and made every-body laugh at one of his ſtories. It was before this creature was thought of for you. Solmes laugh'd too. It was, however,hislaugh: For his firſt three years, at leaſt, I imagine, muſt have been one continual fit of crying; and his muſcles havenever yet been able to recover a riſible tone. His very ſmile (you never ſaw him ſmile I believe; never at leaſt gave him cauſe to ſmile) is ſo little natural to his features, that it appears in him, as hideous as thegrinof a man in malice. 

I took great notice of him, as I do of all the noble Lords of the creation, in their peculiarities; and was diſguſted, nay, ſhock'd at him even then. I was glad I remember, on that particular occaſion, to ſee his ſtrange features recovering their natural gloomineſs; tho' they did this but ſlowly, as if the muſcles which contributed to his diſtortions, had turn'd upon ruſty ſprings. 

What a dreadful thing muſt even the Love of ſuch a huſband be! For my part, were I his wife! (—But what have I done to myſelf, to make but ſuch a ſuppoſition?) I ſhould never have comfort but in his abſence, or when I was quarreling with him. A ſplenetic Lady, who muſt have ſomebody to find fault with, might indeed be brought to endure ſuch a wretch: The ſight of him would always furniſh out the occaſion, and all her ſervants, for That reaſon, and forThatonly, would have cauſe to bleſs their maſter. But how grievous, and apprehenſive a thing muſt it be for his wife, had ſhe the leaſt degree of delicacy, to catch herſelf in having done ſomething to oblige him? 

So much for his perſon: As to the other half of him, he is ſaid to be an inſinuating, creeping mortal to any-body he hopes to be a gainer by: An inſolent, over-bearing one, where he has no ſuch views: And is not this the genuine ſpirit of meanneſs?—He is reported to be ſpiteful and malicious, even to the whole family of any ſingle perſon, who has once diſobliged him; and to his own relations moſt of all. I am told, that they are none of them ſuch wretches as himſelf. This may be one reaſon, why he is for diſinheriting them. 

My Kitty, from one of his domeſtics, tells me, that his tenants hate him: And that he never had a ſervant who ſpoke well of him. Vilely ſuſpicious of their wronging him, probably from the badneſs of his own heart, he is always changing. 

His pockets, they ſay, are continually cramm'd with keys: So that when he would treat a gueſt (a friend he has not out of your family), he is half as long puzzlingwhichiswhich,as his niggardly treat might be concluded in.—And if it be wine, he always fetches it himſelf: Nor has he much trouble in doing ſo; for he has very few viſitors—only thoſe, whom buſineſs or neceſſity brings: For a gentleman who can help it, would rather be benighted, than put up at his houſe. 

Yet this is the man they have found out, for the ſake of conſiderations as ſordid as thoſe he is govern'd by, for a huſband (that is to ſay, for a Lord and Maſter) for Miſs Clariſſa Harlowe! 

But perhaps, he may not be quite ſo miſerable as he is repreſented. Characters extremely good, or extremely bad, are ſeldom juſtly given. Favour for a perſon will exalt the one, as disfavour will ſink the other. But your uncle Antony has told my mamma, who objected to his covetouſneſs, that it was intendedto tie himup, as he called it,to your own terms; which would be with a hempen, rather than a matrimonial cord, I dare ſay! But, is not this a plain indication, that even his own recommenders think him a mean creature; and that he muſt be articled with—perhaps forneceſſaries?But enough, and too much, of ſuch a mortal as this!—You muſt not have him, my dear—That I am clear in—tho' not ſo clear, how you will be able to avoid it, except you aſſert the independence which your eſtate gives you. 

HERE my mamma broke in upon me. Shewanted to ſee what I had written. I was ſilly enough to read Solmes's character to her. 

She own'd, that the man was not the moſt deſirable of men; had not the happieſt appearance: But what was perſon in a man? And I was chidden for ſetting you againſt complying with your father's will. Then follow'd a lecture upon the preference to be given in favour of a man who took care to diſcharge all his obligations to the world, and to keep all together, in oppoſition to a ſpendthrift or profligate: A fruitful ſubject, you know, whether any particular perſon be meant by it, or not: Why will theſe wiſe parents, by ſaying too much againſt the perſons they diſlike, put one upon defending them? Lovelace is not a ſpendthrift; owes not obligations to the world; tho', I doubt not, profligate enough. Then, putting one upon doingſuchbut common juſtice, we muſt needs be prepoſſeſſed, truly!—And ſo we are put, perhaps, uponcurioſitiesfirſt, how ſuch a one or his friends may think of one;—And then, but too probably, a diſtinguiſhing preference, or ſomething that looks like it, comes in. 

My mamma charg'd me, at laſt, to write that ſide over again.—But excuſe me, my good mamma! I would not have the character loſt upon any conſideration; ſince my vein ran freely into it: And I never wrote to pleaſe myſelf, but I pleaſed you. A very good reaſon why:—We have but one mind between us—Only, that ſometimes you are a little too grave, methinks; I, no doubt, a little too flippant in your opinion. 

This difference in our tempers, however, is probably the reaſon that we love one anotherſowell, that, in the words of Norris, nothird lovecan come in between: Since each, in the other's eye, having ſomething amiſs, and each loving the other well enough to bear being told of it; and the rather, perhaps, as neither wiſhes to mend it; This takes off agood deal from that rivalry which might encourage a little, if not a great deal, of that latent ſpleen, which in time might riſe into envy, and That into ill-will. So, my dear, if This be the caſe, let each keep her fault, and much good may do her with it, ſay I: For there is conſtitution in both to plead for it: And what an hero or heroine muſt he or ſhe be, who can conquer a conſtitutional fault? Let it beavarice,as in ſome Idare notname: Let it begravity,as in mybeſt friend:Or let it beflippancy,as in—I need not ſay whom. 

It is proper to acquaint you, that I was obliged to comply with my mamma'scurioſity.—My mamma has her ſhare, herfullſhare, ofcurioſity,my dear—and to let her ſee here and there, ſome paſſages of your letters.— 

I am broke in upon—But I will tell you by-and-by, what paſſed between my mamma and me, on this occaſion—And the rather, as ſhe had her GIRL, her favourite HICKMAN, and your LOVELACE, all at once in her eye.— 

Thus it was: 

'I cannot but think, Nancy, ſaid ſhe, after all, that there is a little hardſhip in Miſs Harlowe's caſe: And yet, as her mamma ſays, it is a grating thing to have a child, who was always noted for her duty inſmallerpoints, to ſtand in oppoſition to her parents will, in thegreater; yea, in thegreateſt of all.And now, to middle the matter between both, it is pity, that the man they inſiſt upon her accepting has not that ſort of merit, which ſo delicate a mind as Miſs Harlowe's might reaſonably expect in a huſband.—But then, this man is ſurely preferable to a libertine: To a libertine too, who has had a duel with her own brother.Fathersandmothersmuſtthink ſo, were itnotfor that circumſtance—And it is ſtrange iftheydo not know beſt.' 

And ſo they muſt, thought I, from their experience, if no little, dirty views givethemalſo that prepoſſeſſion in one man's favour, which they are ſo apt to cenſure their daughters for having in another's—And if, as I may add in your caſe, they have no creeping, old, muſty, uncle Antony's to ſtrengthen their prepoſſeſſions, as he does my mamma's—Poor, creeping, poſitive ſoul, what has ſuch an old bachelor as he to do, to prate about the duties of children to parents; unleſs he had a notion that parents owe ſome to their children? But your mamma, by her indolent meekneſs, let me call it, has ſpoiled all the three brothers. 

'But you ſee, child, proceeded my mamma, what a different behaviour MINE is to YOU. I recommend to you one of the ſobereſt, yet politeſt, men in England.—' 

I think little of my mamma'spoliteſt,my dear. She judges of honeſt Hickman for herdaughter,as ſhe would have done, I ſuppoſe, twenty years ago, forherſelf:For Hickman appears to me to be a man of that antiquated cut; as to his mind I mean: A great deal too much upon the formal, you muſt needs think him to be, yourſelf. 

'Of a good family, continued my mamma; a fine, clear, and improving eſtate (a prime conſideration with my mamma, as well as with ſome other folks, whom you know): And Ibegand Iprayyou to encourage him: At leaſt, not to uſe him theworſe,for his being ſo obſequious to you.' 

Yes, indeed! To uſehimkindly, that he may treatmefamiliarly—But diſtance to the men-wretches is beſt—I ſay. 

'Yet all will hardly prevail upon you to do as I would have you. What would you ſay, were I to treat you as Miſs Harlowe's father and mother treat her?' 

'What would Iſay,Madam!—That's eaſily anſwer'd. I would SAY nothing. Can you think ſuch uſage, and to ſuch a young lady, is to be borne? 

'Come, come, Nancy, be not ſo haſty: You have heard but one ſide; and that there ismoreto be ſaid is plain, by your reading to me, but parts of her letters. They are her parents.Theymuſt know beſt. Miſs Harlowe, as fine a child as ſhe is, muſt havedoneſomething, muſt haveſaidſomething (you know how they lov'd her), to make them uſe her thus.' 

'But ifſheſhould be blameleſs, Madam, how does your own ſuppoſition condemnthem?' 

Then came up Solmes's great eſtate; his good management of it—'A little too NEAR indeed,' was the word!—(O how money-lovers,thought I,will palliate!Yet my mamma is a princeſs in ſpirit to this Solmes!)'What ſtrange effects have prepoſſeſſion and love upon young ladies!' 

I don't know how it is, my dear; but people take ſtrange delight in finding out folks in love; Curioſitiesbegetcurioſities: I believe that's the thing! 

She proceeded to praiſe Mr. Lovelace's perſon, and his qualifications natural and acquired: But then ſhe would judge asmotherswill judge, and asdaughtersare very loth to judge:—But could ſay nothing in anſwer to your offer of living ſingle; and breaking with him—if—if—(three or fourIf'sſhe made of one good one, If)thatcould be depended on, ſhe ſaid. 

But ſtillobedience without reſerve,reaſon what I will, is the burden of my mamma's ſong: And This, formyſake, as well asyours. 

I muſt needs ſay, that I think duty to parents is a very meritorious excellence: But I bleſs God I have not your trials. We can all be good when we have no temptation nor provocation to the contrary:—But few young perſons (who can help themſelves too) would bear what you bear. 

I will not mention all that is upon my mind, in relation to the behaviour of your father and uncles, and the reſt of them, becauſe I would not offend you: But I have now a higher opinion of my own ſagacity, than ever I had, in that I could never cordially love any one of your family but yourſelf. I am notbornto like them. But it is mydutyto be ſincere to myfriend:And this will excuſe her Anna Howe to Miſs Clariſſa Harlowe. I ought indeed to have excepted your mamma; a lady to be reverenced; and now to be pity'd. What muſt have been her treatment, to be thus ſubjugated, as I may call it? Little did the good old Viſcount think, when he married his darling, his only, daughter to ſo well-appearing a gentleman, and to her own liking too, that ſhe would have been ſo much kept down. Another would call your father a tyrant, if you will not: All the world indeed would: And if you love your mother, you ſhould not be very angry at the world for taking that liberty. Yet, after al•I cannot help thinking, that ſhe is the leſs to be pitied, as ſhe may be ſaid (be the gout, or what will, the occaſion of his moroſeneſs) to have long behaved unworthy of her birth and fine qualities, in yielding to incroaching ſpirits (you may confine the reflection to your brother, if it will pain you to extend it); and This for the ſake of preſerving a temporary peace to herſelf; which is the leſs worth attempting to preſerve, as it always produced a ſtrength in the will of others, and a weakneſs in her own, that has ſubjected her to an arbitrarineſs which grew, and became eſtabliſhed, upon her patience.—And now to give up the moſt deſerving of her children, againſt her judgment, a ſacrifice to the ambition and ſelfiſhneſs of the leaſt deſerving—But I fly from this ſubject—having, I fear, ſaid too much to be forgiven for—and yet much leſs than is in my heart to ſay upon the over-meek ſubject. 

Mr. Hickman is expected from London this evening. I have deſired him to inquire after Lovelace'slife and converſation in town. If he has not, I ſhall be very angry with him. Don't expect a very good account of either. He is certainly an intriguing wretch, and full of inventions. 

Upon my word, I moſt heartily deſpiſe that ſex! I wiſh they would let our fathers and mothers alone; teazingthemto teazeuswith their golden promiſes, and proteſtations, and ſettlements, and the reſt of their oſtentatious nonſenſe. How charmingly might you and I live together, and deſpiſe them all!—But to be cajoled, wire-drawn, and inſnared, like ſilly birds, into a ſtate of bondage, or vile ſubordination: To be courted as princeſſes for a few weeks, in order to be treated as ſlaves for the reſt of our lives—Indeed, my dear, as you ſay of Solmes, I cannot endure them!—But for your relations (friendsno more will I call them, unworthy as they are even of theothername!) to take ſuch a wretch's price as That; and to the cutting off all reverſions from his own family!—How muſt a mind but commonly juſt reſiſt ſuch a meaſure! 

Mr. Hickman ſhall ſound Lord M. upon the ſubject you recommend. But beforehand, I can tell you what he and what his ſiſters will ſay, when theyareſounded. Who would not be proud of ſuch a relation as Miſs Clariſſa Harlowe?—Mrs. Forteſcue told me, that they are all your very great admirers. 

If I have not been clear enough in my advice about what you ſhall do, let me ſay, that I can give it in one word: It is only by re-urging you to RESUME. If you do, all the reſt will follow. 

We are told here, that Mrs. Norton, as well as your aunt Hervey, has given her opinion on theimplicitſide of the queſtion. If ſhe can think, that the part ſhe has had in your education, and your own admirable talents and acquirements, are to be thrown away upon ſuch a worthleſs creature as Solmes, I could heartily quarrel with her. You may think I ſay this to leſſen your regard for the good woman. And perhapsnot wholly without cauſe, if you do. For, to own the truth, methinks, I don't love her ſo well as I ſhould do, did you love her ſo apparently leſs, that I could be out of doubt, that you love me better. 

Your mamma tells you,'That you will have great trials: That you are under your papa'sdiſcipline.'— The word's enough for me to deſpiſe them who give occaſion for its uſe!—'That it is out of her power to help you!'And again:'That if you have any favour to hope for, it muſt be by the mediation of your uncles!'I ſuppoſe you will write to the oddities; ſince you are forbid to ſee them!—But can it be, that ſuch a lady, ſuch a ſiſter, ſuch a wife, ſuch a mother, has no influence in her own family? Who indeed, as you ſay, would marry, that can live ſingle? My choler is again beginning to riſe. RESUME, my dear:—And that's all I will give myſelf time to ſay further, leſt I offend you, when I cannot ſerve you—Only this, that I am 

Your truly affectionate friend and ſervant, ANNA HOWE.LETTER XXVIII. MiſsCLARISSA HARLOWE,To MiſsHOWE.
Friday, Mar. 10.YOU will permit me, my dear, to touch upon a few paſſages in your laſt favour, that affect me ſenſibly. 

In the firſt place, you muſt allow me to ſay, low as I am in ſpirits, that I am very angry with you for your reflections on my relations, particularly on my father, and on the memory of my grandfather. Nor, my dear, does your own mamma always eſcape the keen edge of your vivacity. One cannot one'sſelfforbear to write or ſpeak freely of thoſe we love andhonour; that is to ſay, when grief wrings the heart: But it goes againſt one to hear any body elſe take the ſame liberties. Then you have ſo very ſtrong a manner of expreſſion, where you take a diſtaſte, that when paſſion has ſubſided, and I come by reflection to ſee byyourſeverity what I have given occaſion for, I cannot help condemning myſelf. Let me then, as matters ariſe, make my complaints to you; but be it your part to ſoothe and ſoften my angry paſſions, by ſuch advice as nobody better knows how to give: And this the rather, as you know what an influence your advice has upon me. 

I cannot help owning, that I am pleaſed to have you join with me in opinion of the contempt which Mr. Solmes deſerves from me. But yet, permit me to ſay, that he is not quite ſo horrible a creature as you make him: As to hisperſon,I mean; for with regard to hismind,by all I have heard, you have done him but juſtice: But you have ſuch a talent at an ugly likeneſs, and ſuch a vivacity, that they ſometimes carry you out of veriſimilitude. In ſhort, my dear, I have known you, in more inſtances than one, ſit down reſolved to write all that wit, rather than ſtrict juſtice, could ſuggeſt upon the given occaſion. Perhaps it may be thought, that I ſhould ſay the leſs on this particular ſubject, becauſe your diſlike to him ariſes from love to me: But ſhould it not be our aim to judge of ourſelves, and of every thing that affects us, as we may reaſonably imagine other people would judge of us, and of our actions? 

As to the advice you give, to reſume my eſtate, I am determin'd not to litigate with my papa, let what will be the conſequence to myſelf. I may give you, at another time, a more particular anſwer to your reaſonings on this ſubject: But, at preſent, will only obſerve, that it is my opinion, that Lovelace himſelf would hardly think me worth addreſſing, were he to knowthisto be my reſolution. Theſemen,my dear, with all their flatteries, look forward to the PERMANENT. Indeed, it is fit they ſhould. For Love muſt be a very fooliſh thing to look back upon, when it has brought perſons born to affluence into indigence; and laid a generous mind under the hard neceſſity of obligation and dependence. 

You very ingeniouſly account for the love we bear to one another, from thedifferencein our tempers. I own, I ſhould not have thought of That. There may poſſibly be ſomething in it: But whether there be, or not, whenever I am cool, and give myſelf time to reflect, I will love you the better for the correction you give me, be as ſevere as you will upon me. Spare me not therefore, my dear friend, whenever you think me in the leaſt faulty. I love your agreeable raillery: You know I always did: Nor, howeverover-ſerious you think me, did I ever think youflippant,as you harſhly call it. One of the firſt conditions of our mutual friendſhip was, that each ſhould ſay or write to the other whatever was upon her mind, without any offence to be taken: A condition, that is indeed an indiſpenſable in all friendſhip. 

I knew your mamma would be for implicit obedience in a child. I am ſorry my caſe is ſo circumſtanced, that Icannotcomply: As my Mrs. Norton ſays, it would be my duty to do ſo, if I could. You are indeed very happy, that you have nothing but your own agreeable, yet whimſical, humours to contend with, in the choice ſhe invites you to make of Mr. Hickman!—How happy ſhould I be, to be treated with ſo much lenity! I ſhould bluſh to havemymamma ſay, that ſhebegg'dandpray'dme, and all in vain, to encourage a man ſo unexceptionable as Mr. Hickman. 

Indeed, my beloved Miſs Howe, I am aſham'd to have your mamma ſay, with ME in her view,'What ſtrange effects have Prepoſſeſſion and Love upon young creatures of our ſex!'This touches me themore ſenſibly, becauſe you yourſelf, my dear, are ſo ready toperſuademe into it. I ſhould be very blameable to endeavour to hide any the leaſt byas upon my mind, from you: And I cannot but ſay,—that this man—this Lovelace—is a perſon that might be liked well enough, if he bore ſuch a character as Mr. Hickman bears; and even if there were hopes of reclaiming him: But LOVE, methinks, as ſhort a word as it is, has abroadſound with it. Yet do I find, that one may be driven, by violent meaſures, ſtep by ſtep, as it were, into ſomething that may be called—I don't know what to call it—Aconditional kind of liking,or ſo:—But as to the word LOVE—juſtifiable and charming as it is in ſome caſes (that is to ſay, in all therelative,in all theſocial,and, what is ſtill beyond both, in all ourſuperiorduties, in which it may be properly calleddivine); it has, methinks, in this narrow, circumſcribed, ſelfiſh, peculiar ſenſe, no very pretty ſound with it: Treat me as freely as you will in all other reſpects, I will love you, as I have ſaid, the better for your friendly freedom: But, methinks, I could be glad, for SEX-ſake, that you would not let this imputation paſs ſo glibly fromyourpen, oryourlips, as attributable to one of your own ſex, whether I be the perſon or not: Since theothermuſt have adoubletriumph, when a perſon of your delicacy (arm'd with ſuch contempts of them all, as you would have one think) can give up a friend, with an exultation over her weakneſs, as a ſilly, love-ſick creature! 

I could make ſome other obſervations upon the contents of your laſt two letters; but my mind is not free enough at preſent. The occaſions for the above ſtuck with me; and I could not help taking the earlieſt notice of them. 

I will now acquaint you with all proceedings here: But theſe ſhall be the ſubject of another Letter. 

LETTER XXIX. MiſsCLARISSA HARLOWE,To MiſsHOWE.
Saturday, March 11.I Have had ſuch taunting meſſages, and ſuch repeated avowals of ill-offices, brought me from my brother and ſiſter, if I do not comply with their wills (delivered, too, with provoking ſaucineſs by Betty Barnes), that I have thought it proper, before I enter'd upon my intended addreſs to my uncles, in purſuance of the hint given me in my mamma's letter, to expoſtulate a little withthem.But, I have done it in ſuch a manner, as will give you (if you pleaſe to take it as you have done ſome parts of my former letters) great advantage over me. In ſhort, you will have more cauſe than ever, to declare me far gone in Love, if my reaſons for the change of my ſtyle, in theſe letters, with regard to Mr. Lovelace, do not engage your more favourable opinion.—For I have thought proper to give them their own way; and, ſince they will have it, that I have a preferable regard for Mr. Lovelace, I give them cauſe rather to confirm their opinion than doubt it. 

Theſe are my reaſons in brief, for the alteration of my ſtyle. 

In the firſt place, they have grounded their principal argument for my compliance with their will, upon my acknowlegements that my heart is free; and ſo ſuppoſing I give up no preferable perſon, my oppoſition has the look of downright obſtinacy in their eyes; and they argue, that, at worſt, my averſion to Solmes, is an averſion that may be eaſily ſurmounted, andoughtto be ſurmounted in duty to my father, and for the promotion of family views. 

Next, altho' they build upon this argument in order to ſilence me, they ſeem not to believe me, buttreat me as violently, and as diſgracefully, as if I were in love with one of my father's footmen:—So that my conditional willingneſs to give up Lovelace, has procur'd me no favour. 

In the next place, I cannot but think, that my brother's antipathy to him is far from being well-grounded: His inordinate paſſion for the ſex is his crime, that is always rung in my ears; and a very great one it is: But, does my brother recriminate upon him thus, in love to me?—No—His whole behaviour ſhews me, that That is not his motive, and that he thinks me rather in his way, than otherwiſe. 

It is then the call of juſtice, as I may ſay, to ſpeak up a little for a man, who, altho' provok'd by my brother, did not do him all the miſchief he could have done him, and which my brother had endeavour'd to dohim.It might not be amiſs therefore, I thought, to alarm them a little with an apprehenſion, that the methods they are taking with me, are the very reverſe of thoſe they ſhould take to anſwer the end they deſign by them: And after all, what is the compliment I make Mr. Lovelace, if Iallowit to be thought, that I do really prefer him to ſuch a man, as him they terrify me with? Then, my Miſs Howe (concluded I) accuſes me of a tameneſs, which ſubjects me to inſults from my brother: I will keep that dear friend in my eye; and foralltheſe conſiderations, try what a little ofherſpirit will do—ſit it ever ſo aukwardly upon me. 

In this way of thinking, I wrote to my brother and ſiſter. This is my Letter to him. 

TREATED, as I am treated, and, in a great meaſure, if notwholly,by your inſtigations, brother, you muſt permit me to expoſtulate with you upon the occaſion. It is not myintentionto diſpleaſe you in what I am going to write: And yet I muſt deal freely with you: The occaſion calls for it. 

And permit me, in the firſt place, to remind you, That I am yourſiſter; and not yourſervant; and that, therefore, the bitter revilings and paſſionate language brought me from you, upon an occaſion, in which you have no reaſon to preſcribe to me, are neither worthy of my character to bear, or of yours to offer. 

Put the caſe, that Iwereto marry the man you diſlike, and that he werenotto make a polite or tender huſband, Is that a reaſon for you to be an unpolite and diſobliging brother?—Why muſtyou,Sir, anticipate my misfortunes, were ſuch a caſe to happen?—Let me tell you plainly, that the huſband who could treat me, as awife,worſe than you, of late, have treated me as aſiſter,muſt be a barbarous man indeed. 

Aſk yourſelf, I pray you, Sir, If you would thus have treated your ſiſter Bella, had ſhe thought fit to receive the addreſſes of the man ſo much hated by you?—If not, let me caution you, my brother, not to take your meaſures by what you thinkwill beborne, but rather by whatoughtto be offer'd. 

How wouldyoutake it, if you had a brother, who, in a like caſe, were to act byyou,as you do byme?You cannot but remember what a laconic anſwer you gave even to my papa, who recommended to you Miſs Nelly D'Oily:—You did not like her,were your words: And that was thought ſufficient. 

You muſt needs think, that I cannot but know towhomto attribute my diſgraces, when I recollect my papa's indulgence to me, in permitting me to decline ſeveral offers; and towhom,that a common cauſe is endeavoured to be made, in favour of a man whoſe perſon and manners are more exceptionable, than thoſe of any of the gentlemen I have been permitted to refuſe. 

I offer not to compare the two men together: Nor is there, indeed, the leaſt compariſon to be made between them. All the difference to the one's diſadvantage,if I did, is but in one point—Of the greateſt importance, indeed—But to whom ofmoſtimportance?—Tomyſelf,ſurely, were I to encourage his application:—Of the leaſt toyou.Nevertheleſs, if you do not, by your ſtrange policies, unitethat manandmeas joint-ſufferers in one cauſe, you ſhall find me as much reſolv'd to renounce him, as I am to refuſe the other. I have made an overture to this purpoſe: I hope you will not give me reaſon to confirm my apprehenſions, that it will be owing toyou,if it be not accepted. 

It is a ſad thing, to have it to ſay, without being conſcious of ever having given you cauſe of offence, that I have inyouabrother,but not afriend. 

Perhaps you will not condeſcend to enter into the reaſons of your late conduct with a fooliſh ſiſter: But, ifpoliteneſs,ifcivility,be not due to that character, and to my ſex,juſticeis. 

Let me take the liberty further to obſerve, that the principal end of a young gentleman's education at the univerſity, is, to learn him to reaſon juſtly, and to ſubdue the violence of his paſſions: I hope, brother, that you will not give room for any-body who knows us both, to conclude, that the•oilette has learned the one more of the latter doctrine, than the univerſity has taught the other. I am truly ſorry to have cauſe to ſay, that I have heard it often remarked, that your uncontrouled paſſions are not a credit to your liberal education. 

I hope, Sir, that you will excuſe the freedom I have taken with you: You have given me too much reaſon for it, and you have taken much greater with me,withoutreaſon;—ſo, if you are offended, ought to look at the cauſe, and not at the effect:—Then examining yourſelf, that cauſe will ceaſe, and there will not be any-where a more accompliſh'd gentleman than my brother. 

Siſterly affection, I do aſſure you, Sir (unkindly,as you have uſedme), and not the pertneſs which of late you have been ſo apt to impute to me, is my motive in this hint. Let me invoke your returning kindneſs, myonly brother!And give me cauſe, I beſeech you, to call you mycompaſſionating friend.For I am, and ever will be, 

Your affectionate ſiſter, CL. HARLOWE.This is my brother's anſwer. 

To MiſsCLARISSA HARLOWE.
I Know, there will be no end of your impertinent ſcribble, if I don't write to you. I write therefore: But, without entring into argument with ſuch a conceited and pert preacher and queſtioner, it is, to forbid you to plague me with your quaint nonſenſe. I know not what Wit in a woman is good for, but to make her over-value herſelf, and deſpiſe everybody elſe. Yours, Miſs Pert, has ſet you above your duty, and above being taught or preſcrib'd to, either by parents, or any-body elſe—But go on, Miſs, your mortification will be the greater; That's all, child. Itſhall,I aſſure you, if I can make it ſo, ſo long as you prefer that villainous Lovelace, who is juſtly hated by all your family. We ſee by your Letter now, as well as we too juſtly ſuſpected before, moſt evidently, what hold he has got of your forward heart. But the ſtronger the hold, the greater muſt be the force (and you ſhall have enough of that) to tear ſuch a miſcreant from it. In me, notwithſtanding your ſaucy lecturing, and as ſaucy reflections before, you are ſure of a friend, as well as a brother, if it be not your own fault. But if you will ſtill think of ſuch a huſband as that Lovelace, never expect either in 

JA. HARLOWE.I will now give you a copy of my letter to my ſiſter; with her unſiſterly anſwer. 

IN what, my dear ſiſter, have I offended you, that inſtead of endeavouring to ſoften my father's anger againſt me (as I am ſure, I ſhould have done for you, had my unhappy caſe been yours) you ſhould, in ſo hard-hearted a manner, join to aggravate not only his diſpleaſure, but my mamma's againſt me. Make but my caſe your own, my dear Bella; and ſuppoſe you were commanded to marry Mr. Lovelace (to whom you are believed to have an antipathy), would you not think it a very grievous injunction?—Yet cannot your diſlike to Mr.Lovelacebe greater than mine is to Mr.Solmes.Nor are Love and Hatred voluntary paſſions. 

My brother may, perhaps, think it a proof of amanlyſpirit, to be an utter ſtranger to the gentle paſſions. We have both heard him boaſt, that he never loved with diſtinction; and, having predominating paſſions, and checked in his firſt attempt, perhaps he never will: It is the leſs wonder then, raw from the college, ſo lately himſelf thetutored,that he ſhould ſet up for a tutor, a preſcriber to our gentler ſex, whoſe taſtes and manners are differently formed; For what, according to his account, are colleges, but claſſes of tyrants, from the upper ſtudents over the lower, and from them to the tutor?—Thathe,with ſuchmaſculinepaſſions, ſhould endeavour to controul and bear down an unhappy ſiſter, in a caſe where his antipathy, and, give me leave to ſay, his ambition (once you would have allowed the latter to be his fault), can be gratify'd by ſo doing, may not be quite ſo much to be wonder'd at—But, that aſiſterſhould give up the cauſe of a ſiſter, and join with him to ſet her father and mother againſt her, in a caſe relative to ſex; in a caſe that might have been her own—Indeed, my Bella, this is not pretty in you. 

There was a time that Mr. Lovelace was thought reclaimable, and when it was far from being deem'd a cenſurable view to hope to bring back to the paths of virtue and honour, a man of his ſenſe and underſtanding. I am far from wiſhing to make the experiment:—But nevertheleſs will ſay, That if I havenota regard for him, the diſgraceful methods taken to compel me to receive the addreſſes of ſuch a man as Mr. Solmes, are enough to inſpire it. 

Do you, my ſiſter, for one moment, lay aſide all prejudice, and compare the two men in their births, their educations, their perſons, their underſtandings, their manners, their air, and their whole deportments; and in their fortunes too, taking in reverſions; And then judge of both: Yet, as I have frequently offer'd, I will live ſingle with all my heart, if that will do. 

I cannot thus live in diſpleaſure and diſgrace!—I would, if I could, oblige all my friends—But will it bejuſt,will it behoneſt,to marry a man I cannot endure?—If I have not been uſed to oppoſe the will of my father, but have always delighted to oblige and obey, judge of the ſtrength of my antipathy, by the painful oppoſition I am obliged to make, and cannot help it. 

Pity then, my deareſt Bella, my ſiſter, my friend, my companion, my adviſer, as you uſed to be when I was happy, andplead for, 

Your ever-affectionate CL. HARLOWE.To MiſsCLARY HARLOWE.
LET it be pretty, or not pretty, in your wiſe opinion, I ſhall ſpeak my mind, I'll aſſure you, both of you and your conduct, in relation to this deteſted Lovelace. You are a fond, fooliſh girl, with all your wiſdom. Your letter ſhewsthatenough intwenty places. And as to your cant of living ſingle, nobody will believe you, This is one of your fetches to avoid complying with your duty, and the will of the moſt indulgent parents in the world, as yours have been to you, I am ſure—Tho' now they ſee themſelves finely requited for it. 

We all, indeed, once thought your temper ſoft and amiable: But why was it?—You never was contradicted before: You had always your own way. But no ſooner do you meet with oppoſition in your wiſhes to throw yourſelf away upon a vile rake, but you ſhew what you are!—You cannot love Mr. Solmes! that's the pretence; but ſiſter, ſiſter, let me tell you, that is becauſe Lovelace has got into your fond heart: A wretch hated, juſtly hated, by us all; and who has dipped his hands in the blood of your brother:—Yethimyou would make our relation, would you? 

I have no patience with you, but for putting the caſe of my liking ſuch a vile wretch as him. As to the encouragement you pretend he received formerly from all our family, it was before we knew him to be ſo vile: And the proofs that had ſuch force uponus,ought to have had ſome uponyou:—Andwould,had you not been a fooliſh forward girl; as on this occaſion every-body ſees you are. 

O how you run out in favour of the wretch!—His birth, his education, his perſon, his underſtanding, his manners, his air, his fortune—Reverſions too taken in to augment the ſurfeiting catalogue! What a fond ſtring of love-ſick praiſes is here!—And yet you would live ſingle—Yes, I warrant!—When ſo many imaginary perfections dance before your dazled eye!—But no more—I only deſire, that you will not, while you ſeem to have ſuch an opinion of your wit, think every one elſe a fool; and that you can at pleaſure, by your whining flouriſhes, make us all dance after your lead. 

Write as often as you will, this ſhall be the laſt anſwer or notice, you ſhall have upon this ſubject from 

ARABELLA HARLOWE.I had in readineſs a letter for each of my uncles; and meeting in the garden a ſervant of my uncle Harlowe, I gave them to him to deliver according to their reſpective directions. If I am to form a judgment by the anſwers I have received from my brother and ſiſter, as above, I muſt not, I doubt, expect any good from them. But when I have try'd every expedient, I ſhall have the leſs to blame myſelf for, if any thing unhappy ſhould fall out. I will ſend you copies of both, when I ſhall ſee what notice they will be thought worthy of, if of any. 

LETTER XXX. MiſsCLARISSA HARLOWE,To MiſsHOWE.
Sunday night, March 12.THIS man, this Lovelace, gives me great uneaſineſs. He is extremely bold and raſh. He was this afternoon at our church: In hopes to ſee me, I ſuppoſe: And yet, if he had ſuch hopes, his uſual intelligence muſt have failed him. 

Shorey was at church; and a principal part of her obſervation was upon his haughty and proud behaviour, when he turn'd round in the pew where he ſat, to our family-pew.—My papa and both my uncles were there; ſo were my mamma and ſiſter. My brother happily was not!—They all came home in diſorder. Nor did the congregation mind any-body but him; it being his firſt appearance there, ſince the unhappy rencounter. 

What did the man come for, if he intended to look challenge and defiance, as Shorey ſays he did, and as others obſerved it ſeems as well as ſhe? Did he come formyſake; and, by behaving in ſuch a mannerto thoſe preſent of my family, imagine he was doing me either ſervice o•pleaſure?—He knows how they hate him: Nor will he take pains, would pains do, to obviate their hatred. 

You and I, my dear, have often taken notice of his pride; and you have rallied him upon it; and inſtead of exculpating himſelf, he has own'd it; and, by owning it, has thought he has done enough. 

For my own part, I thought pride, in his caſe, an improper ſubject for raillery.—People of birth and fortune to be proud, is ſo needleſs, ſo mean a vice!—If theydeſervereſpect, they will have it, without requiring it. In other words, for perſons to endeavour to gain reſpect by a haughty behaviour, is to give a proof that they miſtruſt their own merit: To make confeſſion that theyknowthat theiractionswill not attract it.—Diſtinction or Quality may be prided in by thoſe to whom diſtinction or quality is anewthing. And then the reflection and contempt which ſuch bring upon themſelves, by it, is a counter-balance. 

Such added advantages too, as this man has in his perſon and mien; learned alſo, as they ſay he is;—Sucha man to be haughty, to be imperious!—The lines of his own face at the ſame time condemning him—How wholly inexcuſable!—Proud of what? Not of doing well: The onlyjuſtifiablepride.—Proud ofexterioradvantages!—Muſt not one be led by ſuch aſtop-ſhortpride, as one may call it, in him or her who has it, to miſtruſt theinterior.Some people may indeed be afraid, that if they did not aſſume, they would be trampled upon. A very narrow fear, however, ſince they trample upon themſelves who can fearthis.But this man muſt be ſecure, that humility would be an ornament to him. 

He has talents, indeed: But thoſe talents, and his perſonal advantages, have been ſnares to him. It is plain they have. And this ſhews, that, weigh'd in an equal balance, he would be found greatly wanting. 

Had my friends confided, as they did at firſt, in that diſcretion which they do not accuſe me of being defective in, I dare ſay I ſhould have found him out: And then ſhould have been as reſolute to diſmiſshim,as I was to diſmiſs others, and as Iamnever to have Mr. Solmes. O that they did but know my heart!—It ſhall ſooner burſt, than voluntarily, uncompelled, undriven, dictate a meaſure that ſhall caſt a ſlur either upon them, my ſex, or myſelf. 

Excuſe me, my dear friend, for theſe graveſoliloquies,as I may call them. How have I run from reflection to reflection! But the occaſion is recent!—They are all in commotion below upon it! 

Shorey ſays, that he watched my mamma's eye, and bowed to her: And ſhe return'd the compliment. He always admir'd my mamma. She would not, I believe, have hatedhim,had ſhe not beenbidto hate him; and had it not been for the rencounter between him and her only ſon. 

Dr. Lewin was at church; and obſerving, as everyone elſe did, the diſorder into which Mr. Lovelace's appearance had put all our family, was ſo good as to engage him in converſation, when the ſervice was over, till they were all gone to their coaches. 

My father it ſeems is more and more incenſed againſt me. And ſo are my uncles: They had my letters in the morning. Their anſwers, if they vouchſafe to anſwer me, will demonſtrate, I doubt not, the unſeaſonableneſs of this raſh man's preſence at our church. 

They are angry, it ſeems, at my mamma, for returning his compliment. What an enemy is hatred, even to the common forms of civility! which, however, more diſtinguiſh thepayerof a compliment, than thereceiver.But they all ſee, they ſay, that there is but one way to put an end to his inſults. So I ſhall ſuffer: And in what will the raſh man have benefited himſelf, or mended his proſpects? 

I am extremely apprehenſive, that this worſe than ghoſt-like appearance of his, bodes ſome ſtill bolder ſtep. If he come hither (and very deſirous he is of my leave to come), I am afraid there will be murder. To avoid That, if there were no other way, I would moſt willingly be bury'd alive. 

They are all in conſultation: Upon my letters, I ſuppoſe: So they were in the morning, which occaſion'd my uncles to be atourchurch. I will ſend you the copies of thoſe letters, as I promiſed in my laſt, when I ſee whether I can give you their anſwers with them. This letter is all—I-cannot-tell-what—the effect of apprehenſion and diſpleaſure at the man who has occaſioned theſe apprehenſions: Six lines would have contained all that is in it to the purpoſe of my ſtory. 

CL. H.See Letterxxxvi.for Mr. Lovelace's account of his behaviour and intentions in his appearance at their church. 

LETTER XXXI. Mr.LOVELACE,ToJOHN BELFORD,Eſq.
Monday, March 13.IN vain doſtTheſe gentlemen affected the Roman ſtyle, as they called it, in their letters: And it was an agreed rule with them, to take in good part whatever freedoms they treated each other with, if the paſſages were written in that ſtyle.thou and thy compeers preſs me to go to town, while I am in ſuch an uncertainty as I am at preſent with this proud Beauty. All the ground I have hitherto gained with her, is intirely owing to her concern for the ſafety of people whom I have reaſon to hate. 

Write then, thou biddeſt me, if I will not come. That, indeed, I can do; and as well without a ſubject,as with one. And what follows ſhall be a proof of it. 

The Lady's malevolent brother has now, as I told thee at M. Hall, introduced another man; the moſt unpromiſing in his perſon and qualities, the moſt formidable in his offers, that has yet appeared. 

This man has, by his propoſals, captivated every ſoul of the Harlowe's—Soul!did I ſay?—There is not a ſoul among them but my charmer's: And ſhe, withſtanding them All, is actually confin'd, and otherwiſe maltreated, by a Father the moſt gloomy and poſitive; at the inſtigation of a Brother the moſt arrogant and ſelfiſh—But thou knoweſt their characters; and I will not therefore ſully my paper with them. 

But is it not a confounded thing to be in love with one, who is the daughter, the ſiſter, the niece, of a family I muſt eternally deſpiſe? And the devil of it, That Love increaſing, with her—What ſhall I call it?—'Tis not ſcorn:—'Tis not pride:—'Tis not the inſolence of an adored beauty:—But 'tis tovirtue,it ſeems, that my difficulties are owing: And I pay for not being a ſly ſinner, an hypocrite: for being regardleſs of my reputation; for permitting ſlander to open its mouth againſt me. But is it neceſſary for ſuch a one as I, who have been uſed to carry all before me, upon my own terms—I, who never inſpir'd a Fear, that had not a diſcernibly-predominant mixture of Love in it; to be an hypocrite?—Well ſays the poet:He who ſeems virtuous does but act a part;And ſhews not his own nature, but his art. 

Well, but, it ſeems, I muſtpractiſefor This art, if I would ſucceed with this truly admirable creature! But whypractiſefor it?—Cannot Iindeedreform?—I have butonevice;—Have I, Jack?—Thou knoweſt my heart, if any man living does. As far as I know it myſelf, thou knoweſt it.—But 'tis a curſed deceiver—For it has many and many a time impoſedupon its maſter—Maſter,did I ſay? That am I not now: Nor have I been, from the moment I beheld this angel of a woman: Prepared indeed as I was by her character, before I ſaw her: For what a mind muſt that be, which, tho' not virtuous itſelf, admires not virtue in another?—My viſit to Arabella, owing to a miſtake of the ſiſters, into which, as thou haſt heard me ſay, I was led by the blundering uncle; who was to introduce me (but lately come from abroad) to thedivinity,as I thought; but, inſtead of her, carry'd me to amere mortal.And much difficulty had I, ſo fond and ſo forward my Lady, to get off, without forfeiting All with a family that I intended ſhould give me a goddeſs. 

I have boaſted, that I was once in love before:—And indeed I thought I was. It was in my early manhood—with that Quality-jilt, whoſe infidelity I have vow'd to revenge upon as many of the ſex as ſhall come into my power. I believe, in different climes, I have already ſacrificed an hecatomb to my Nemeſis, in purſuance of this vow. But upon recollecting what I wasthen,and comparing it with what I find in myſelfnow,I cannot ſay, that I was ever in love before. 

What was it then, doſt thou aſk me, ſince the diſappointment had ſuch effects upon me, when I found myſelf jilted, that I was hardly kept in my ſenſes?—Why I'll tell thee what, as near as I can remember; for it was a great while ago:—It was—egad, Jack, I can hardly tell what it was—But a vehement aſpiration after a novelty, I think—Thoſe confounded Poets, with their celeſtially-terrene deſcriptions, did as much with me as the Lady: They fired my imagination, and ſet me upon a deſire to become a goddeſs-maker. I muſt needs try my new-fledg'd pinions, in ſonnet, elogy, and madrigal. I muſt have a Cynthia, a Stella, a Sachariſſa, as well as the beſt of them: Darts, and flames, and the devil knows what, muſt Igive to my Cupid. I muſt create beauty, and place it where nobody elſe could find it: And many a time have I been at a loſs for a ſubject, when my new-created goddeſs has been kinder than it was proper for my plaintive ſonnet ſhe ſhould be. 

Then I had a vanity ofanotherſort in my paſſion: I found myſelf well-received among the women in general; and I thought it a prettylady-liketyranny (I was very young then, and very vain) to ſingle out ſomeoneof the ſex, to makehalf a ſcorejealous. And I can tell thee, it had its effect: For many an eye have I made to ſparkle with rival indignation: Many a cheek glow; and even many a fan have I cauſed to be ſnapped at a ſiſter-beauty; accompany'd with a reflection, perhaps, at being ſeen alone with a wild young fellow, who could not be in private with both at once. 

In ſhort, Jack, it was more Pride than Love, as I now find it, that put me upon making ſuch a confounded rout about loſing this noble var•eteſs. I thought ſhe loved me at leaſt as well as I believed I loved her: Nay, I had the vanity to ſuppoſe ſhe could not help it. My friends were pleaſed with my choice. They wanted me to be ſhackled. For early did they doubt my morals, as to the ſex. They ſaw, that the dancing, the ſinging, the muſical Ladies were all fond of my company: For who (I am in a humour to be vain, I think!—for who) danc'd, who ſung, who touch'd the ſtring, whatever the inſtrument, with a better grace than thy friend? 

I have no notion of playing the hypocrite ſo egregiouſly, as to pretend to be blind to qualifications which every-one ſees and acknowleges. Such praiſe-begging hypocriſy! Such affectedly-diſclaim'd attributes! Such contemptible•raiſe-traps!—But yet, ſhall my vanity extend only toperſonals,ſuch as the gracefulneſs of dreſs, my debonnaire, and my aſſureance?—Self-taught, ſelf-acquired, theſe!—For myPARTS, I value not myſelf uponthem.Thou wilt ſay, I have no cauſe.—Perhaps not: But if I had any thing valuable as to intellectuals, thoſe are not my own: And to be proud of what a man is anſwerable for the abuſe of, and has no merit in the right uſe of, is to ſtrut, like the jay, in a borrowed plumage. 

But to return to my fair jilt—I could not bear, that a woman, who was the firſt that had bound me in ſilken fetters (they were not iron ones, like thoſe I now wear) ſhould prefer a'coronet to me: And when the bird was flown, I ſet more value upon it, than when I had it ſafe in my cage, and could viſit it when I would. 

But now am I in-deedin love. I can think of nothing, of no-body elſe, but the divine Clariſſa Harlowe.—Harlowe!—How that hated word ſticks in my throat—But I ſhall give her for it, the name of LoveLovelace.. 

CLARISSA!—O there's muſic in the name,That ſoft'ning me to infant tenderneſs,Makes my heart ſpring like the firſt leaps of life!But could'ſt thou have thought that I, who think it poſſible for me to favour as much as I can be favoured; that I, who for this charming creature think of foregoing thelife of honourfor thelife of ſhackles; could adopt thoſe over-tender lines of Otway? 

I check myſelf, and l•aving the three firſt lines of the following of Dryden's to the family of the whiners, find the workings of the paſſion in my ſtormy ſoul better expreſſed by the three laſt:Love various minds does variouſly inſpire;He ſtirs in gentle natures gentle fire:Like that of incenſe on the altar laid.But raging flames tempeſtuous ſouls invade:A fire, which ev'ry windy paſſion blows;With pride it mounts, and with revenge it glows. 

And with REVENGE itſhallglow!—For, doſt thou think, that if it were not from the hope, That this ſtupid family are all combin'd to do my work for me, I would bear their inſults?—Is it poſſible to imagine, that I would be brav'd as I am brav'd, threaten'd as I am threaten'd, by thoſe who are afraid to ſee me; and by this brutal brother too, to whom I gave a life (A life, indeed, not worth my taking!); had I not a greater pride in knowing, that by means of his very Spy upon me, I am playing him off as I pleaſe; cooling, or inflaming, his violent paſſions, as may beſt ſuit my purpoſes; permitting ſo much to be reveal'd of my life and actions, and intentions, as may give him ſuch a confidence in his double-fac'd agent, as ſhall enable me to dance his employer upon my own wires? 

This it is, that makes my pride mount above my reſentment. By this engine, whoſe ſprings I am continually oiling, I play them all off. The buſy old tarpaulin uncle I make but my embaſſador to Queen Annabella Howe, to engage her (for example ſake to her Princeſsly daughter) to join in their cauſe, and to aſſert an authority they are reſolv'd, right or wrong (or I could do nothing), to maintain. 

And what my motive, doſt thou aſk? No leſs than this, That my beloved ſhall find no protection out of my family; for, if I knowhers,fly ſhe muſt, or have the man ſhe hates. This, therefore, if I take my meaſures right, and my Familiar fail me not, will ſecure her mine, in ſpight of them all; in ſpight of her own inflexible heart: Mine, without condition; without reformation-promiſes; without the neceſſity of a ſiege of years, perhaps; and to be even then, after wearing the guiſe of a merit-doubting hypocriſy, at an uncertainty, upon a probation unapproved of—Then ſhall I have all the raſcals, and raſcaleſſes of the family come creeping to me: I preſcribing tothem; and bringing that ſordidly-imperious brother to kneel at the foot-ſtool of my throne. 

All my fear ariſes from the little hold I have in the heart of this charming froſt-piece: Such a conſtant glow upon her lovely features: Eyes ſo ſparkling: Limbs ſo divinely turn'd: Health ſo florid: Youth ſo blooming: Air ſo animated: To have an heart ſo impenetrable—AndI,the hitherto ſucceſsful Lovelace, the addreſſor—How can it be?—Yet there are people, and I have talk'd with ſome of them, who remember, that ſhe wasborn:—Her nurſe Norton boaſts of her maternal offices in her earlieſt infancy; and in her educationgradatim.—So that there is full proof, that ſhe came not from above, all at once an angel! How then can ſhe be ſo impenetrable? 

But here's her miſtake; nor will ſhe be cured of it—She takes the man ſhe calls her father (her mother had been faultleſs, had ſhe not been her father's wife); ſhe takes the men ſhe calls her uncles; the fellow ſhe calls her brother; and the poor contemptible ſhe calls her ſiſter; tobeher father, tobeher uncles, her brother, her ſiſter; and that, as ſuch, ſhe owes to ſome of them reverence, to others reſpect, let them treat her ever ſo cruelly!—Sordid ties! Mere cradle-prejudices!—For had they not been impoſed upon her by Nature, when ſhe was in a perverſe humour, or could ſhe have choſen her relations, Would any of theſe have been among them? 

How my heart riſes at her preference of them to me, when ſhe is convinc'd of their injuſtice to me! Convinc'd that the alliance would do honour to them all—herſelf excepted; to whom every-one owes honour; and from whom the moſt princely family might receive it. But how much more will my heart riſe with indignation againſt her, if I find ſhe heſitates but one moment (however perſecuted) about preferring me to the man ſhe avowedly hates! But ſhe cannot ſurely be ſo mean, as to purchaſe her peacewith them at ſo dear a rate. She cannot give a ſanction to projects form'd in malice, and founded in a ſelfiſhneſs (and that at her own expence) which ſhe has ſpirit enough to deſpiſe in others; and ought to diſavow, that we may not think her a Harlowe. 

By this incoherent ramble thou wilt gather, that I am not likely to come up in haſte; ſince I muſt endeavour firſt to obtain ſome aſſurance from the beloved of my ſoul, that I ſhall not be ſacrific'd to ſuch a wretch as Solmes! Woe be to the fair-one, if ever ſhe bedriveninto my power (for I deſpair of a voluntary impulſe in my favour), and I find a difficulty in obtaining this ſecurity! 

That her indifference to me is not owing to the ſuperior liking ſhe has foranyother man, is what rivets my chains: But take care, fair-one; take care, O thou moſt exalted of female minds, and lovelieſt of perſons, how thou debaſeſt thyſelf, by encourageing ſuch a competition as thy ſordid relations have ſet on foot in mere malice to me!—Thou wilt ſay I rave. And ſo I do! 

Perdition catch my ſoul, but I do love her.Elſe,could I bear the perpetual revilings of her implacable family?—Elſe,could I baſely creep about—not her proud father's houſe—but his paddock—and garden-walls?—Yet (a quarter of a mile's diſtance between us) not hoping to behold the leaſt glimpſe of her ſhadow?—Elſe,ſhould I think myſelf repaid, amply repaid, if the fourth, fifth, or ſixth midnight ſtroll, thro' unfrequented paths, and over briery incloſures, afford me a few cold lines; the evenexpectedpurport only to let me know, that ſhe values the moſt worthleſs perſon of her very worthleſs family, more than ſhe values me; and that ſhe would not write at all, but to induce me to bear inſults, which un-manme to bear!—My lodging in the intermediate way, at a wretched alehouſe; diſguiſed like an inmate of it: Accommodations equally vile, as thoſeI met with in my Weſtphalian journey. 'Tis well, that the neceſſity for all This ariſes not from ſcorn and tyranny; but is firſt impoſed upon herſelf! 

But was ever hero in romance (oppoſing giants and dragons excepted) called upon to harder trials?—Fortune and family, and reverſionary grandeur, on my ſide! Such a wretched fellow my competitor!—Muſt I not be deplorably in love, that can go thro' theſe difficulties, encounter theſe contempts? By my ſoul, I am half-aſham'd of myſelf: I, who am perjur'd too, by priority of obligation, if I am faithful to any woman in the world! 

And yet, why ſay I, I am half aſham'd?—Is it not a glory to loveherwhom every-one who ſees her, either loves, or reveres, or both? Dryden ſays,The cauſe of Love can never be aſſign'd,'Tis in no face;—But in the lover's mind. 

And Cowley thus addreſſes Beauty as a mere imaginary:Beauty! thou wild fantaſtic ape,Who doſt in ev'ry country change thy ſhape:Here black; there brown; here tawny; and there white;Thou flatterer! who comply'ſt with every ſight!Who haſt no certain What, nor Where.But both theſe, had they been her cotemporaries, and known her, would have confeſs'd themſelves miſtaken: And, taking together perſon, mind, and behaviour, would have acknowleg'd thejuſticeof the univerſal voice in her favour. 

—Full many a LadyI've ey'd with beſt regard; and many a timeTh' harmony of their tongues hath into bondageBrought my too diligent ear. ForſeveralvirtuesHave I lik'dſeveralwomen. Never anyWith ſo full ſoul, but ſome defect in herDid quarrel with the nobleſt grace ſhe ow'd,And put it to thefoil.ButSHE!—OSHE!So perfect and ſo peerleſs is created,Of ev'ry creature's beſt.—Thou art curious to know, If I have not ſtarted a new game?—If it be poſſible for ſo univerſal a lover to be confined ſo long to one object? Thou knoweſt nothing of this charming creature, that thou canſt put ſuch queſtions to me; or thinkeſt thou know'ſt me better than thou doſt. All that's excellent in her ſex is this Lady!—Until bymatrimonial,orequalintimacies, I have found her leſs than angel, it is impoſſible to think of any other. Then there are ſo many ſtimulatives to ſuch a ſpirit as mine in this affair, beſides Love: Such a field for ſtratagem and contrivance, which thou knoweſt to be the delight of my heart: Then the rewarding end of all;—To carry off ſuch a girl as This, in ſpight of all her watchful and implacable friends; and in ſpight of a prudence and reſerve, that I never met with in any of the ſex:—What a triumph!—What a triumph over the whole ſex! And then ſuch a Revenge to gratify; which is only at preſent politically rein'd-in, eventually to break forth with the greater fury:—Is it poſſible, think'ſt thou, that there can be room for a thought that is notofher, and devotedtoher? 

BY the advices I have this moment received, I have reaſon to think, that I ſhall have occaſion for thee here. Hold thyſelf in readineſs to come down upon the firſt ſummons. 

Let Belton, and Mowbray, and Tourville, likewiſe prepare themſelves. I have a great mind to contrive a method to ſend James Harlowe to travel for improvement. Never was there Booby-'Squire that more wanted it.Contriveit, did I ſay? I havealreadycontriv'd it; could I but put it in execution without being ſuſpected to have a hand in it. This I am reſolved upon; If I have not hisſiſter,I will havehim. 

But be This as it may, there is a preſent likelihood of room for glorious miſchief. A confederacy had been forſome timeform'd againſt me; but the uncles and the nephew arenowto bedouble-ſervanted (ſingle-ſervanted they were before), and thoſe ſervants are to bedouble-arm'd when they attend their maſters abroad. This indicates their reſolute enmity to me, and as reſolute favour to Solmes. 

The reinforced orders for this hoſtile apparatus are owing, it ſeems, to a viſit I made yeſterday to their church; a good place to begin a reconciliation in, were the heads of the family chriſtians, and did they mean any thing by their prayers. My hopes were to have an invitation (or, at leaſt, to gain a pretence) to accompany home the gloomy ſire; and ſo get an opportunity to ſee my goddeſs: For, I believed they durſt not but becivilto me, at leaſt. But they were filled with terror, it ſeems, at my entrance; a terror they could not get over. I ſaw it indeed in their countenances; and that they all expected ſomething extraordinary to follow.—And ſo itſhouldhave done, had I been more ſure than I am of their daughter's favour. Yet not a hair of any of their ſtupid heads do I intend to hurt. 

You ſhall all have your directions in writing, if there be occaſion. But, after all, I dare ſay there will be no need but to ſhew your faces in my company. 

Such faces never could four men ſhew—Mowbray's ſo fierce and ſo fighting: Belton's ſo pert and ſo pimply: Tourville's ſo fair and ſo foppiſh: Thine ſo rough and ſo reſolute: AndIyour leader!—What hearts, altho' meditating hoſtility, muſt thoſe be which we ſhall not appall?—Each man occaſionally attended by a ſervant or two, long ago choſen for qualities reſembling his maſter's. 

Thus, Jack, as thou deſireſt, have I written: Written upon Something; upon Nothing; upon Revenge, which I love; upon Love, which I hate,heartilyhate, becauſe 'tis my maſter: And upon the devil knows what beſides:—For, looking back, I'm amaz'd at the length of it.Thoumay'ſt read it:Iwould not for a King's ranſom—But ſo as I dobutwrite, thou ſay'ſt thou wilt be pleaſed. 

Be pleaſed then. Icommandthee to be pleaſed: If not for the writer's, or written's ſake, for thy word's ſake. And ſo in the royal ſtyle (for am I not likely to be thy King and thy Emperor, in the great affair before us?) I bid Thee very heartily 

Farewell.LETTER XXXII. MiſsCLARISSA HARLOWE,To MiſsHOWE.
Tueſday, March 14.I Now ſend you copies of my letters to my uncles: With their anſwers. Be pleaſed to return the latter, by the firſt depoſite. I leave them foryou,to make remarks upon.Iſhall make none. 

ToJOHN HARLOWE,Eſq
Sat. March 11.ALLOW me, my honoured Second Papa, as in my happy days you taught me to call you, to implore your intereſt with my papa, to engage him to diſpenſe with a command, which, if inſiſted upon, will deprive me of my free-will, and make me miſerable for my whole life. 

For mywhole life!let me repeat: Is that a ſmall point, my dear uncle, to give up? Am notIto live with the man? Is any-body elſe? Shall I not therefore be allow'd to judge for myſelf, whether Ican,or can-notlivehappily,with him? 

Should it be ever ſoun-happily, will it be prudence to complain, or appeal? If it were, to whom could I appeal with effect againſt a huſband? And wouldnot the invincible and avow'd diſlike I have for him atſetting out,juſtify, as it might ſeem, any ill uſage from him,in that ſtate; were I to be ever ſo obſervant of him? And if I were to beat all ſo,it muſt be from Fear, not Love.— 

Once more, let me repeat, That this is not aſmallpoint to give up: And that it isfor life.Why, I pray you, good Sir, ſhould I be made miſerable forlife?Why ſhould I be deprived of all comfort, but that which the hope, that it would be a very ſhort one, would afford me? 

Marriage is a very ſolemn engagement, enough to make a young creature's heart ake, with thebeſtproſpects, when ſhe thinks ſeriouſly of it!—To be given up to a ſtrange man; To be ingrafted into a ſtrange family; To give up her very name, as a mark of her becoming his abſolute and dependent property: To be obliged to prefer this ſtrange man, to father, mother,—to every body:—And his humours to all her own—Or to contend, perhaps, in breach of a vow'd duty, for every innocent inſtance of free-will: To go no whither: To make acquaintance: To give up acquaintance:—To renounce even the ſtricteſt friendſhips perhaps; all at his pleaſure, whether ſhe think it reaſonable to do ſo or not:—Surely, Sir, a young creature ought not to be obliged to make all theſe ſacrifices, but for ſuch a man as ſhe can approve.—If ſheis,how ſad muſt be the caſe!—How miſerable the life, if to be calledlife! 

I wiſh I could obey you all. What a pleaſure would it be to me, if I could!Marry firſt, and Love will come after,was ſaid by one of my deareſt friends! But, 'tis a ſhocking aſſertion! A thouſand things may happen to make that ſtate but barely tolerable, where it is entered into with mutual affection: What muſt it then be, where the huſband can have no confidence in the love of his wife; but has reaſon ratherto queſtion it, from the preference hehimſelfbelieves ſhe would have given to ſomebody elſe, had ſhe been at her own option? What doubt, what jealouſies, what want of tenderneſs, what unfavourable prepoſſeſſions, will there be, in a matrimony thus circumſtanced? How will every look, every action, even the moſt innocent, be liable to miſconſtruction?—While, on the other hand, an indifference, a careleſſneſs to oblige, may take place; and Fearonlycan conſtrain even anappearanceof what ought to be the real effect of undiſguiſed Love? 

Think ſeriouſly of theſe things, dear good Sir, and repreſent them to my papa, in that ſtrong light which the ſubject will bear; but in which my ſex, and my tender years and inexperience, will not permit me to paint it; and uſe your powerful intereſt, that your poor niece may not be conſigned to a miſery ſo durable. 

I have offer'd to engage not to marry at all, if that condition may be accepted. What a diſgrace is it to me to be thus ſequeſter'd from company, thus baniſh'd my papa's and mamma's preſence, thus ſlighted and deſerted by you, Sir, and my other kind uncle! And to be hinder'd from attending at that public worſhip, which, were Ioutof the way of my duty, would be moſt likely to reduce me into the right path again!—Is this the way, Sir, can it be thought, to be taken with a free and open ſpirit?—May not this ſtrange method rather harden than convince?—I cannot bear to live in diſgrace thus: The very ſervants, ſo lately permitted to be under my own direction, hardly daring to ſpeak to me; my own ſervant diſcarded with high marks of undeſerved ſuſpicion and diſpleaſure, and my ſiſter's maid ſet over me. 

The matter may be too far pu•h'd: Indeed it may: And then, perhaps, every one will be ſorry for their parts in it. 

May I be ſuffered to mention an expedient?—IfIamto be watch'd, baniſh'd, and confin'd; Suppoſe, Sir, it were to be at your houſe?—Then the neighbouring gentry will the leſs wonder, that the perſon of whom they uſed to think ſo favourably, appeared not at church here; and that ſhe received not their viſits. 

I hope, there can be no objection to This. You uſed to love to have me with you, Sir, when all wenthappilywith me: And will you not now permit me, in mytroubles,the favour of your houſe, till all this diſpleaſure be overblown?—Upon my word, Sir, I will not ſtir out of doors, if you require the contrary of me: Nor will I ſee any body, but whom you'll allow me to ſee; provided you will not bring Mr. Solmes to perſecute me there. 

Procure, then, this favour for me; if you cannot procure the ſtill greater, that of a happy reconciliation; which nevertheleſs I preſume to hope for, ifyouwill be ſo good as to plead for me: And you will then add to thoſe favours, and to that indulgence, which have bound me, and then will for ever bind me, to be 

Your dutiful and obliged Niece, CL. HARLOWE.TheANSWER.
Sunday night.My dear Niece,IT grieves me to be forced to deny you any thing you aſk. Yet itmuſtbe ſo; for unleſs you can bring your mind to oblige us in this one point, in which our promiſes and honour were engaged before we believed there could be ſo ſturdy an oppoſition, you muſt never expect to be what you have been to us all. 

In ſhort, niece, we are anembattel'd phalanx; your reading makes you a ſtranger to nothing, but what you ſhould be moſt acquainted with—So you will ſeeby that expreſſion, that we are not to be pierced by your perſuaſions, and invincible perſiſtence. We have agreedallto be moved, ornone; and not to comply without one another: So you know your deſtiny; and have nothing to do but to yield to it. 

Let me tell you, the virtue of obedience lies not in obliging when you can be obliged again:—But give up an inclination, and there is ſome merit in That. 

As to your expedient: You ſhall not come to my houſe, Miſs Clary; tho' this is a prayer I little thought I ever ſhould have deny'd you: For were you to keep your word as toſeeingno-body but whom we pleaſe, yet can youwriteto ſomebody elſe, and receive letters from him: This we too well know you can, and have done—More is the ſhame and the pity! 

Youoffer to live ſingle, Miſs—Wewiſh you marry'd: But becauſe you mayn't have the man your heart is ſet upon, why, truly, you'll have no-body we ſhall recommend: And as we know, that ſome how or other you correſpond with him, or at leaſt did, as long as you could; and as he defies us all, and would not dare to do it, if he were not ſure of you in ſpite of us all (which is not a little vexatious to us, you muſt think); we are reſolv'd to fruſtrate him, and triumph over him, rather than he over us: That's one word for all. So expect not any advocateſhip from me: I will not plead for you; and that's enough. From 

Your diſpleaſed Uncle, JOHN HARLOWE.P. S.For the reſt, I refer to my brother Antony. 

ToANTONY HARLOWE,Eſq.
Saturday, March 11.Honoured Sir,AS you have thought fit to favour Mr. Solmes with your particular recommendation, and was veryearneſt in his behalf, ranking him (as you told me, upon introducing him to me) amongſt your ſelect friends; and expecting my regards to him accordingly; I beg your patience, while I offer a few things, out of many that I could offer, to your ſerious conſideration, on occaſion of his addreſs to me, if I am to uſe that word. 

I am charged with prepoſſeſſion in another perſon's favour: You will be pleaſed, Sir, to conſider, that, till my brother returned from Scotland, that other perſon was not diſcouraged, nor was I forbid to receive his viſits: And is it ſuch a crime in me, if Iſhouldprefer an acquaintance of Twelve months to one of Two?—I believe it will not be pretended, that in birth, education, or perſonal endowments, a compariſon can be made between the two. And only let me aſk you, Sir, if the one would have been thought of for me, had he not made ſuch offers, as, upon my word, I think,Iought not in juſtice to accept, norheto propoſe: Offers, which ifhehad not made, I dare ſay, mypapawould not have required them of him. 

But the one, it ſeems, has many faults:—Is the other fault-leſs?—The principal thing objected to Mr. Lovelace (and a very inexcuſable one) is, that he is immoral in his Loves:—Is not the other in his Hatreds?—Nay, as I may ſay, in his Loves too (the object only differing), ifthe love of moneybethe root of all evil? 

But, Sir, if I am prepoſſeſſed, what has Mr. Solmes to hope for?—Why ſhould he perſevere? What muſt I think of the man who would wiſh me to behisagainſt my inclination?—And is it not a very harſh thing for my friends to deſire to ſee me marry'd to one Icannotlove, when they will not be perſuaded but that there is one Idolove? 

Treated as I am, now is the time for me to ſpeak out, or never.—Let me review what it is Mr. Solmes depends upon on this occaſion. Does he believe, that the diſgrace which I ſuffer on his account, will givehim a merit with me? Does he think to win my eſteem, thro' my uncles ſternneſs to me; by my brother's contemptuous uſage; by my ſiſter's unkindneſs; by being deny'd to viſit, or be viſited; and to correſpond with my choſen friend, altho' a perſon of unexceptionable honour and prudence, and of my own ſex; my ſervant to be torn from me, and another ſervant ſet over me; to be confined, like a priſoner, to narrow and diſgraceful limits, in order avowedly to mortify me, and to break my ſpirit; to be turn'd out of that family-management which I loved, and had the greater pleaſure in it, becauſe it was an eaſe, as I thought, to my mamma, and what my ſiſter choſe not; and yet, tho' time hangs heavy upon my hands, to be ſo put out of my courſe, that I have as little inclination as liberty to purſue any of the choice delights of my life—Are theſe ſteps neceſſary to reduce me to a ſtandard ſo low, as to make me a fit wife for this man?—Yet theſe are all he can have to truſt to—And if his reliance is on theſe meaſures, I would have him to know, that he miſtakesmeekneſsandgentleneſsof diſpoſition forſervilityandbaſeneſsof heart. 

I beſeech you, Sir, to let the natural turn and bent ofhismind, andmymind be conſidered: What are his qualities, by which he would hope to win my eſteem?—Dear, dear Sir, if Iamto be compelled, let it be in favour of a man that can read and write—That canteachme ſomething: For what a huſband muſt that man make, who can do nothing but command; and needs himſelf the inſtruction he ſhould be qualified to give? 

I may be conceited, Sir; I may be vain of my little reading; of my writing; as of late I have more than once been told I am—But, Sir, the more unequal the propoſed match, if ſo: The better opinion I have of myſelf, the worſe I muſt have of him; and the more unfit are we for each other. 

Indeed, Sir, I muſt ſay, I thought my friends hadput a higher value upon me. My brother pretended once, that it was owing to ſuch value, that Mr. Lovelace's addreſs was prohibited.—Can this be; and ſuch a man as Mr. Solmes be intended for me? 

As to his propoſed ſettlements, I hope I ſhall not incur your greater diſpleaſure, if I ſay what all who know me have reaſon to think, and ſome have upbraided me for, that I deſpiſe thoſe motives. Dear, dear Sir, what are ſettlements to one who has as much of her own as ſhe wiſhes for?—Who has more in her own power, as a ſingle perſon, than it is probable ſhe would be permitted to have at her diſpoſal, as a wife!—Whoſe expences and ambition are moderate; and, if ſhe had ſuperfluities, would rather diſpenſe them to the neceſſitous, than lay them by her uſeleſs? If then ſuch narrow motives have ſo little weight with me for myownbenefit, ſhall the remote and uncertain view of family-aggrandizement, and that in the perſon of mybrotherand hisdeſcendants,be thought ſufficient to influence me? 

Has the behaviour of that brother to me of late, or his conſideration for the family (which had ſo little weight with him, that he could chooſe to hazard a life ſo juſtly precious as an only ſon's, rather than not gratify paſſions which he is above attempting to ſubdue, and, give me leave to ſay, has been too much indulged in, either for his own good, or the peace of any-body related to him; Has his behaviour, I ſay) deſerved ofmein particular, that I ſhould make a ſacrifice of my temporal (and, who knows? of my eternal) happineſs, to promote a plan, that, if I might be permitted to examine it, I will venture to engage to demonſtrate it to be, if not abſurd, very precarious, and what muſt depend upon improbable contingencies? 

I am afraid you will condemn my warmth: But does not the occaſion require it? To the want of a greater degree of earneſtneſs in my oppoſition, it ſeems, it is owing, that ſuch advances have been made, ashave been made. Then, dear Sir, allow ſomething, I beſeech you, for a ſpirit raiſed and imbittered by diſgraces, which (knowing my own heart) I am confident to ſay, are unmerited. 

But why have I ſaid ſo much, in anſwer to the ſuppoſed charge of prepoſſeſſion, when I have declared to my mamma, as now, Sir, I do to you, that if it be not inſiſted upon that I ſhall marry any other perſon, particularly this Mr. Solmes, I will enter into any engagements never to have the other, nor any man elſe, without their conſents; that is to ſay, without the conſents of my Father and Mother, and of you my Uncle, and my eldeſt Uncle, and my couſin Morden, as he is one of the truſtees for my grandfather's bounty to me.—As to my Brother indeed, I cannot ſay, that his treatment of me has been, of late, ſo brotherly, as to intitle him to more than civility from me: And forthis,give me leave to add, he would be very much my debtor. 

If I have not been explicit enough in declaring my diſlike to Mr. Solmes, that the charge ofprepoſſeſſionmay not be ſuppoſed to influence me againſt him, I do declare ſolemnly, That, were there no ſuch man as Mr. Lovelace in the world, I would not havehim.It is neceſſary, in ſomeoneof my letters to my dear friends, that I ſhould write ſo clearly as to put this out of all doubt: And to whom can I better addreſs myſelf, with an explicitneſs that can admit of no miſtake, than to a gentleman who profeſſes the higheſt regard for plain-dealing and ſincerity? 

Let me then, for theſe reaſons, be ſtill more particular in ſome of my exceptions to him. 

Mr. Solmes appears to me (to all the world indeed) to have a very narrow mind, and no great capacity: He is coarſe and indelicate; as rough in his manners as in his perſon: He is not only narrow, but covetous: Being poſſeſſed of great wealth, he enjoys it not; nor has the ſpirit to communicate to a diſtreſs of anykind. Does not his own ſiſter live unhappily, for want of a little of his ſuperfluities? And ſuffers he not his aged uncle, the brother of his own mother, to owe to the generoſity of ſtrangers the poor ſubſiſtence he picks up from half-a-dozen families?—You know, Sir, my open, free, communicative temper: How unhappy muſt I be, circumſcribed in his narrow, ſelfiſh circle? out of which, being with-held by this diabolical parſimony, he dare no more ſtir, than a conjurer out of his; nor would let me. 

Such a man as this,love!—Yes, perhaps he may, my grandfather's eſtate; which he has told ſeveral perſons (and could not reſiſt hinting it to me, with that ſort of pleaſure which a low mind takes, when it intimates its own intereſt as a ſufficient motive for it to expect another's favour) lies ſo extremely convenient for him, that it would double the value of a conſiderable part of his own. That eſtate, and an alliance which would do credit to his obſcurity and narrowneſs, may make him think hecanlove, and induce him to believe hedoes:But, at moſt, it is but a ſecond-place Love. Riches were, are, and always will be, his predominant paſſion.Hiswere left him by a miſer, on this very account: And I muſt be obliged to forego all the choice delights of my life, and be as mean as he, or elſe be quite unhappy! Pardon, Sir, this ſeverity of expreſſion!—One is apt to ſay more than one would, of a perſon one diſlikes, when more is ſaid in his favour than he can poſſibly deſerve; and when he is urged to my acceptance with ſo much vehemence, that there is no choice left me. 

Whether theſe things be perfectly ſo, or not, while Ithinkthey are, it is impoſſible I ſhould ever look upon him in the light he is offered to me. Nay, were he to be proved ten times better than I have repreſented him, and ſincerely think him; yet would he be ſtill ten times more diſagreeable to me thanany other man I know in the world. Let me therefore beſeech you, Sir, to become an advocate for your niece, that ſhe may not be made a victim of, to a man ſo highly diſguſtful to her. 

You, and my other uncle, can do a great deal for me, if you pleaſe, with my papa. Be perſuaded, Sir, that it is not obſtinacy I am governed by: It is averſion; an averſion I cannot overcome: For, if I have butendeavouredto reaſon with myſelf (out of regard to the duty I owe to my papa's will), my heart has recoiled, and I have been averſe to myſelf, for offering but to argue with myſelf, in behalf of a man who, in the light he appears to me, has no one merit; and who, knowing this averſion, could not perſevere as he does, if he had the ſpirit of a man, and a gentleman. 

If, Sir, you can think the contents of this letter reaſonable, I beſeech you to ſupport them with your intereſt: If not—I ſhall be moſt unhappy!—Nevertheleſs, it is but juſt in me ſo to write, as that Mr. Solmes may know what he has to truſt to. 

Forgive, dear Sir, this tedious letter; and ſuffer it to have weight with you; and you will for ever oblige 

Your dutiful and affectionate Niece, CL. HARLOWE.Mr.ANTONY HARLOWE,To MiſsCLARISSA HARLOWE.
Niece CLARY,YOU had better not write to us, or to any of us. To me, particularly, you had better never to have ſet pen to paper, on the ſubject whereupon you have written.He that is firſt in his own cauſe,ſaith the wiſe man,ſeemeth juſt: But his neighbour cometh, and ſearcheth him.And ſo, in this reſpect, will I be yourneighbour; for I will ſearch your heart to the bottom; that is to ſay, if your letter be written fromyour heart. Yet do I know what a taſk I have undertaken, becauſe of the knack you are noted for at writing: But in defence of a father's authority, in behalf of the good, and honour, and proſperity of a family one comes of, what a hard thing would it be, if one could not beat down all the arguments a rebel child (how loth I am to write down that word of Miſs Clary Harlowe!) can bring, in behalf of her obſtinacy? 

In the firſt place, don't you declare (and that contrary to your declarations to your mother) that you prefer the man we all hate, and who hates us as bad?—Then what a character have you given of a worthy gentleman! I wonder you dare write ſo freely of a man we all reſpect. But poſſibly it may be for that very reaſon. 

How you begin your letter!—Becauſe I value Mr. Solmes as my friend, you treat him the worſe—That's the plain Dunſtable of the matter, Miſs!—I am not ſuch a fool but I can ſee That.—And ſo a noted whore-monger is to be choſen before a man who is a money-lover! Let me tell you, niece, this little becomes ſo nice a one as you have been always reckon'd. Who, think you, does moſt injuſtice, a prodigal man, or a ſaving man?—The one ſaves his own money; the other ſpends other people's: But your favourite is a ſinner in grain, and upon record. 

The devil's in your ſex! God forgive me for ſaying ſo—The niceſt of them will prefer a vile rake and Wh—I ſuppoſe I muſt not repeat the word:—TheWordwill offend when theViciousdenominated by that word will be choſen!—I had not been a bachelor to this time, if I had not ſeen ſuch a maſs of contradictions in you all.—Suchgnat-ſtrainersandcamel-ſwallowers,as venerable Holy Writ has it. What names will perverſeneſs call things by—A prudent man, who intends to be juſt to every-body, is a covetous man!—While a vile, proſſigate rake is chriſten'dwith the appellation of a gallant man, and a polite man, I'll warrant you! 

It is my firm opinion, Lovelace would not have ſo much regard for you as he profeſſes; but for two reaſons. And what are theſe?—Why out of ſpite to all of us—one of them: The other, becauſe of your independent fortune. I wiſh your good grandfather had not left what he did ſo much in your own power, as I may ſay. But little did he imagine his beloved grand-daughter would have turned upon all her friends as ſhe has done! 

What has Mr. Solmes to hope for, if you are prepoſſeſs'd!Hey-day! Is thisyou,couſin Clary!—Has he then nothing to hope for from your father's, and mother's, and our recommendations?—No nothing at all, it ſeems!—O brave!—I ſhould think thatthis,with a dutiful child, as we took you to be, wasenough.Depending on this your duty, we proceeded: And now there is no help for it: For we won't be balked: Neither ſhall our friend Mr. Solmes, I can tell you that. 

If your eſtate is convenient for him, what then? Does that, pert couſin, make it out that he does not love you? He had need to expect ſome goodwithyou, that has ſo little good to hope forfromyou; mind that. But pray, is not this eſtateoureſtate, as we may ſay? Have we notallan intereſt in it, and a prior right, if right were to have taken place? And was it more than a good old man's dotage, God reſt his ſoul! that gave it you before us all?—Well then, ought we not to have a choice who ſhall have it in marriage with you? And would you have the conſcience to wiſh us to let a vile fellow who hates us all, run away with it?—You bid me weigh what you write: Do you weigh this, girl: And it will appear we have more to ſay for ourſelves than you were aware of. 

As to your hard treatment, as you call it, thankyourſelf for That: It may be over when you will: So I reckon nothing upon that: You was not baniſh'd and confin'd till all intreaty and fair ſpeeches were try'd with you: Mind that. And Mr. Solmes can't help your obſtinacy:—Let that be obſerv'd too. 

As to being viſited, and viſiting, you never was fond of either: So that's a grievance put into the ſcale to make weight.—As to diſgrace, that's as bad to us as to you: So fine a young creature!—So much as we uſed to brag of you!—And too, beſides, this is all in your power, as the reſt.—But your heart recoils, when you would perſuade yourſelf to obey your parents—Finely deſcrib'd, i'n't it!—Too truly deſcribed, I own, as you go on. I know, that you may love him if you will.—I had a good mind to bid you hate him; then, perhaps, you'd like him the better: For I have always found a moſt horrid romantic perverſeneſs in your ſex. Todoand tolovewhat you ſhould not, is meat, drink, and veſture, to you all. 

I am abſolutely of your brother's mind, That reading and writing, tho' not too much for the wits of you young girls, are too much for your judgments.—You ſay, youmay beconceited, couſin; youmay bevain!—And ſo youare,to deſpiſe this gentleman as you do. He can read and write as well asmoſtgentlemen, I can tell youthat.Who told you Mr. Solmes can't read and write? But you muſt have a huſband who can learn you ſomething!—I wiſh you knew but yourdutyas well as you do your talents—That, niece, you have of late to learn; and Mr. Solmes will therefore find ſomething to inſtruct you in. I won't ſhew him this letter of yours, tho' you ſeem to deſire it, leſt it ſhould provoke him to be too ſevere a ſchool-maſter, when you are his'n. 

But now I think of it, ſuppoſe youarereadier at your pen than he—You will make the more uſeful wife to him; won't you? For who ſo good an oeconomiſt as you?—And you may keep all his accompts, and ſave yourſelves a ſteward.—And, let me tell you,this is a fine advantage in a family: For thoſe ſtewards are often ſad dogs, and creep into a man's eſtate, before he knows where he is; and not ſeldom is he forced to pay them intereſt for his own money. I know not why a good wife ſhould be above theſe things.—'Tis better than lying abed half the day, and junketing and card-playing all the night, and makeing yourſelves wholly uſeleſs to every good purpoſe in your own families, as is now the faſhion among ye—The duce take ye all that do ſo, ſay I!—Only that, thank my ſtars, I am a bachelor!—Then this is a province you are admirably vers'd in: You grieve that it is taken from youhere,you know. So here, Miſs, with Mr. Solmes you will have ſomething to keep account of, for the ſake of you and your children: With t'other, perhaps, you'll have an account to keep, too—But an account of what will go over the left ſhoulder: only of what he ſquanders, what he borrows, and what he owes, and never will pay. Come, come, couſin, you know nothing of the world; a man's a man, and you may have many partners in a handſome man, and coſtly ones too, who may laviſh away all you ſave. Mr. Solmes therefore for my money, and I hope for yours! 

But Mr. Solmes is a coarſe man, he is not delicate enough for your niceneſs, becauſe I ſuppoſe he dreſſes not like a fop and a coxcomb, and becauſe he lays not himſelf out in complimental nonſenſe, the poiſon of female minds. He is a man of ſenſe, I can tell you. No man tal•s more to the purpoſe tous:—But you ſly him ſo, that he has no opportunity given him, to expreſs it toyou:And a man who loves, if he have ever ſo much ſenſe, looks like a fool; eſpecially when he is deſpiſed, and treated as you treated him the laſt time he was in your company. 

As to his ſiſter; ſhe threw herſelf away, (as you want to do) againſt his full warning: For he told her what ſhe had to truſt to, if ſhe married where ſhe didmarry. And he was as good as his word; and ſo an honeſt man ought: Offences againſt warning ought to be ſmarted for. Take care This be not your caſe. Mind that. 

His uncle deſerves no favour fromhim,for he would have circumvented him, and got Sir Oliver to leave to himſelf the eſtate he had always deſigned for him his nephew; and brought him up in the hope of it.Too ready forgiveneſs does but encourage offences:That's your good father's maxim: And there would not be ſo many headſtrong daughters as there are, if this maxim were kept in mind.—Puniſhments are of ſervice to offenders; Rewards ſhould be only to the meriting: And I think the former are to be dealt out rigorouſly, in wilful caſes. 

As to hislove; he ſhews it but too much for your deſervings, as they have been of late; let me tell you That: And This ishismisfortune; and may in time perhaps beyours. 

As to his parſimony, which you wickedly call diabolical—a very free word in your mouth, let me tell ye—Little reaſon haveyouof all people for this, on whom he propoſes, of his own accord, to ſettle all he has in the world: A proof, let him loverichesas he will, that he lovesyoubetter. But that you may be without excuſe on this ſcore, we will tie him up to your own terms, and oblige him, by the marriage articles, to allow you a very handſome quarterly ſum, to do what you pleaſe with. And this has been told you before; and I have ſaid it to Mrs. Howe, that good and worthy lady, before her proud daughter, that you might hear of it again. 

To contradict the charge of prepoſſeſſion to Lovelace, you offer never to have him without our conſents: And what is This ſaying, but that you will hope on for our conſents, and to wheedle and tire us out: Then he will always be in expectation, while you are ſingle: And we are to live on at this rate(are we?), vexed by you, and continually watchful about you; and as continually expoſed to his inſolence and threats. Remember laſt Sunday, girl!—Whatmighthave happen'd, had your brother and he met?—Moreover, you can't do with ſuch a ſpirit as his, as you can with worthy Mr. Solmes: The one you make tremble; the other will make you quake. Mind that: And you will not be able to help yourſelf. And remember, that if there ſhould be any miſunderſtanding betweenoneof them and you, we ſhould all interpoſe; and with effect, no doubt: But with theother,it would beſelf-do ſelf-have,and who would either care or dare to put in a word for you? Nor let the ſuppoſition of matrimonial differences frighten you: Honey-moon laſts not now-a-days above a fortnight; and Dunmow flitch, as I have been informed, wasneverclaimed; tho' ſome ſayonceit was. Marriage is a queer ſtate, child, whether pair'd by the parties or by their friends. Out of three brothers of us, you know, there was but one had courage to marry. And why was it, do you think? We were wiſe by other people's experience. 

Don't deſpiſe money ſo much; you may come to know the value of it: That is a piece ofinſtructionthat youare to learn; and which, according to yourownnotions, Mr. Solmes will beable to teach you. 

I do indeedcondemn your warmth.I won'tallow for diſgraces you bring upon yourſelf.If I thought themunmerited,I would be your advocate. But it was always my notion, that children ſhould not diſpute their parents authority. When your grandfather left his eſtate to you, tho' his three ſons, and a grandſon, and your elder ſiſter were in being, we all acquieſced: And why? Becauſe it was our father's doing. Do you imitate that example: If you will not, thoſe who ſet it you have the more reaſon to hold you inexcuſable. Mind that, Couſin. 

You mention your brother too ſcornfully: And, inyour letter to him, are very diſreſpectful, as well as in your ſiſter's, to her. He is your brother; a third older than yourſelf: And aman:And while you can pay ſo much regard to one man ofa twelve month's acquaintance only,pray be ſo good as not to forget what is due to a brother, who (next to us three brothers) is the head of the family; and on whom the name depends: As upon your dutiful compliance depends the ſucceſs of the nobleſt plan that ever was laid down for the honour of the family you are come of. And pray now let me aſk you, If the honour of That will not be an honour to you?—If you don't think ſo, the more unworthy you. You ſhall ſee the plan, if you promiſe not to be prejudiced againſt it, right or wrong. If you are not beſotted to that man, I am ſure you will like it. If you are, were Mr. Solmes an angel, it would ſignify nothing: For the devil is Love, and Love is the devil, when it gets into any of your heads. Many examples have I ſeen of that. 

If there were no ſuch man as Lovelace in the world, you would not have Mr. Solmes.—Youwould not,Miſs!—Very pretty, truly!—Weſeehow your ſpirit isimbitter'dindeed.—Wonder not, ſince it is come to yourwill nots,that thoſe who have authority over you, ſay,You ſhall have the other.And I am one. Mind that. And if it behoves Youto ſpeak out,Miſs, it behoves US not toſpeak in.What'sſauce for the goofe is ſauce for the gander:Take that in your thought too. 

I humbly apprehend, that Mr. Solmeshas the ſpirit of a man, and a gentleman.I would admoniſh you therefore not to provoke it. He pities you as much as he loves you. He ſays, He will convince you of his love by deeds, ſince he is not permitted by you to expreſs it by words. And all his dependance is upon your generoſity hereafter. We hope hemaydepend upon That: We encourage him to think hemay. And this heartens him up. So that you may lay his conſtancy at your parents and your uncles doors; and This will be another mark of your duty, you know. 

You muſt be ſenſible, that you reflect upon your parents, and all of us, when you tell me you cannot injuſticeaccept of the ſettlements propoſed to you. This reflection we ſhould have wonder'd at from you once; but now we don't. 

There are many other very cenſurable paſſages in this free letter of yours; but we muſt place them to the account of yourimbitteredſpirit: I am glad you mention'd that word, becauſe we ſhould have been at a loſs what to have call'd it:—Much rather have had reaſon to give it a better name. 

I love you dearly ſtill, Miſs. I think you, tho' my niece, one of the fineſt young gentlewomen I ever ſaw. But, upon my conſcience, I think you ought to obey your parents, and oblige me, and my brother John: For you know very well, that we have nothing but your good at heart; conſiſtently, indeed, with the good and honour ofallof us. What muſt we think of any one of it, who would not promote the good of the whole? and who would ſet one part of it againſt another?—Which God forbid, ſay I!—You ſee I am for the good ofall.What ſhallIget by it, let things go as they will? Do I want any thing of any body for my own ſake? Does my brother John?—Well, then, couſin Clary, What would you be at, as I may ſay? 

O but, You can't love Mr. Solmes!—But, I ſay, you know notwhatyou can do. Youencourageyourſelf in your diſlike. Youpermityour heart (little did I think it was ſuch a froward one) torecoil.Take it to taſk, niece;drive it onas faſt as itrecoils(we do ſo in all our ſea-fights, and land-fights too, by our ſailors and ſoldiers, or we ſhould not conquer); and we are all ſure you will overcome it. Andwhy? Becauſe youought.Sowethink, whateveryouthink: And whoſe thoughts are to be preferred? You may be wittier than we; but, if you are wiſer, we have lived ſome of us, let me tell you, to very little purpoſe thirty or forty years longer than you. 

I have written as long a letter as yours. I may not write in ſo lively, or ſo polite a ſtyle as my niece: But I think I have all the argument on my ſide: And you will vaſtly oblige me, if you will ſhew me, by your compliance with all our deſires, that you think ſo too. If you do not, you muſt not expect an advocate, or even a friend, in me, dearly as I love you. For then I ſhall be ſorry to be called 

Your Uncle, ANTONY HARLOWE.Tueſday, Two in the morning.Poſtſcript.
You muſt ſend me no more letters: But a compliable one you may ſend. But I need not have forbid you; for I am ſure, this, by fair argument, is unanſwerable: I know it is. I have written day and night, I may ſay, ever ſince Sunday morning, only church-time, or the like of that: But this is the laſt, I can tell you, from 

A. H.LETTER XXXIII. MiſsCLARISSA HARLOWE,To MiſsHOWE.
Thurſday, March 16.HAVING met with ſuch bad ſucceſs in my application to thoſe of my own family, I have taken a ſtep that will ſurpriſe you. It is no other than writing a letter to Mr. Solmes himſelf. I ſent it; and have his anſwer. He had certainly help in it.For I have ſeen a letter of his; as indifferently worded, as poorly ſpelt. Yet the ſuperſcription is of his dictating, I dare ſay; for he is a formal wretch. With theſe, I ſhall incloſe one from my brother to me, on occaſion of mine to Mr. Solmes. I did think that it was poſſible to diſcourage this man from proceeding; and that would have anſwer'd all my wiſhes. It was worth the trial. But you'll ſee nothing will do. My brother has taken his meaſures too ſecurely. 

ToROGER SOLMES,Eſq
Wedneſday, Mar. 15.SIR,YOU will wonder to receive a letter from me, and more ſtill at the uncommon ſubject of it. But the neceſſity of the caſe will juſtify me, at leaſt in my own apprehenſion; and I ſhall therefore make no other apology for it. 

When you firſt came acquainted with my father's family, you found the writer of This one of the happieſt creatures in the world; beloved by the beſt and moſt indulgent of parents, and rejoicing in the kind favour of two affectionate uncles, and in the eſteem of every one. 

But how is this happy ſcene now changed!—You was pleaſed to caſt a favourable eye upon me. You addreſſed yourſelf to my friends: Your propoſals were approved of by them; approved of without conſulting me; as if my choice and happineſs were of the leaſt ſignification. Thoſe who had a right to all reaſonable obedience from me, inſiſted upon it without reſerve. I had not the felicity to think as they did; almoſt the firſt time my ſentiments differed from theirs. I beſought them to indulge me in a point ſo important to my future happineſs: But, alas, in vain! And then (for I thought it was but honeſt) I told you my mind; and even that my affections were engaged.But, to my mortification, and ſurprize, you perſiſted, and ſtill perſiſt. 

The conſequence of all is too grievous for me to repeat: You, who have ſuch free acceſs to the reſt of the family, know it too well; too well you know it, either for the credit of your own generoſity, or for my reputation. I am uſed, on your account, as I never before was uſed, and never before was thought to deſerve to be uſed; and this was the hard, the impoſſible condition of their returning favour, that I muſt prefer a mantoall others, thatofall others I cannot prefer. 

Thus diſtreſſed, and made unhappy, and all for your ſake, and thro' your cruel perſeverance, I write, Sir, to demand of you the peace of mind you have robbed me of: To demand of you the Love of ſo many dear friends, of which you have deprived me; and, if you have the generoſity that ſhould diſtinguiſh a man, and a gentleman, to adjure you not to continue an addreſs that has been attended with ſuch cruel effects to the creature you profeſs to eſteem. 

If you really value me, as my friends would make me believe, and as you have declared you do, muſt it not be a mean and ſelfiſh value? A value that can have no merit with the unhappy object of it, becauſe it is attended with effects ſo grievous to her? It muſt be foryour own ſakeonly, not formine.And, even in this point, youmuſtbe miſtaken; for would a prudent man wiſh to marry one who has not a heart to give? Who cannot eſteem him? Who therefore muſt prove a bad wife?—And how cruel would it be to make a poor creature a bad wife, whoſe pride it would be to make a good one? 

If I am capable of judging, our tempers and inclinations are vaſtly different. Any other of my ſex will make you happier than I can. The treatment I meet with, and the obſtinacy, as it is called, with which I ſupport myſelf under it, ought to convinceyou of this; were Inotable to give ſo good a reaſon for this my ſuppoſed perverſeneſs, as that I cannot conſent to marry a man whom I cannot value. 

But if, Sir, you have not ſo much generoſity in your value for me, as to deſiſt, formy ownſake, let me conjure you, by the regard due toyourſelf,and to your own future happineſs, to diſcontinue your ſuit, and place your affections on a worthier object: For why ſhould you makememiſerable, andyourſelfnot happy? By this means you will do all that is now in your power, to reſtore me to the affection of my friends; and, if That can be, it will leave me in as happy a ſtate as you found me. You need only to ſay, That you ſee there are no HOPES, as you will perhaps complaiſantly call it, of ſucceeding with me (—And indeed, Sir, there cannot be a greater truth than this—) and that you will therefore no more think of me; but turn your thoughts another way. 

Your compliance with this requeſt, will lay me under the higheſt obligation to your generoſity, and make me ever 

Your well-wiſher, and humble ſervant, CLARISSA HARLOWE.To MiſsCLARISSA HARLOWE.
Theſe moſt humbly preſent. Thurſday, March 16.Deareſt Miſs,YOUR letter has had a very contrary effect upon me, to what you ſeem to have expected from it. It has doubly convinced me of the excellency of your mind, and the honour of your diſpoſition. Call itſelfiſh,or what you pleaſe, I muſt perſiſt in my ſuit; and happy ſhall I be, if by patience and perſeverance, and a ſteady and unalterable devoir, I may at laſt overcome the difficulty laid in my way. 

As your good parents, your uncles, and other friends, are abſolutely determined you ſhall never have Mr. Lovelace, if they can help it; and as I preſumeno other perſon is in the way; I will contentedly wait the iſſue of this matter. And, forgive me, deareſt Miſs; but a perſon ſhould ſooner perſuade me to give up to him my eſtate, as an inſtance of my generoſity, becauſehecould not be happy without it, than I would a much more valuable treaſure, to promote the felicity of another, and make his way eaſier to circumvent myſelf. 

Pardon me, dear Miſs, but I muſt perſevere, tho' I am ſorry you ſuffer on my account, as you are pleaſed to think; for I never before ſaw the Lady I could love: And while there is any hope, and that you remain undiſpoſed of to ſome other happier man, I muſt and will be 

Your faithful, and obſequious admirer, ROGER SOLMES.Mr.JAMES HARLOWE,To MiſsCLARISSA HARLOWE.
Thurſday, March 16.WHAT a fine whim you took into your head, to write a letter to Mr. Solmes, to perſuade him to give up his pretenſions to you!—Of all the pretty romantic flights you have delighted in, this was certainly one of the moſt extraordinary. But to ſay nothing of what fires us all with indignation againſt you (your owning your prepoſſeſſion in a villain's favour, and your impertinence to me and your ſiſter, and your uncles; one of which has given it you home, child); How can you lay at Mr. Solmes's door, the uſage you ſo bitterly complain of?—You know, little fool, as you are, that it is your fondneſs for Lovelace that has brought upon you all theſe things; and which would have happen'd, whether Mr. Solmes had honour'd you with his addreſſes or not. 

As you muſt needs know This to be true, conſider, pretty, witty Miſs, if your fond love-ſick heartcan let you conſider, what a fine figure all your expoſtulations with us, and charges upon Mr. Solmes, make!—With what propriety do you demand ofhimto reſtore to you your former happineſs, as you call it, andmerelycall it, for if you thought our favour ſo, you would reſtore it to yourſelf; ſince it is yet in your own power to do ſo. Therefore, Miſs Pert, none of your pathetics, except in the right place. Depend upon it, whether you have Mr. Solmes, or not, you ſhall never have your heart's delight, the vile rake Lovelace, if our parents, if our uncles, if I, can hinder it. No! you fallen angel, you ſhall not give your father and mother ſuch aſon,nor me ſuch abrother,in giving yourſelf that profligate wretch for ahuſband.And ſo ſet your heart at reſt, and lay aſide all thoughts of him, if ever you expect forgiveneſs, reconciliation, or a kind opinion, from any of your family; but eſpecially from him, who, at preſent, ſtyles himſelf 

Your Brother, JAMES HARLOWE.P. S.I know your knack at letter-writing. If you ſend me an anſwer to this, I'll return it unopen'd, for I won't argue with your perverſeneſs in ſo plain a caſe—Only once for all, I was willing to put you right as to Mr. Solmes; whom I think to blame to trouble his head about you. 

LETTER XXXIV. Mr.LOVELACE,ToJOHN BELFORD,Eſq
Friday, March 17.I Receive, with great pleaſure, the early and chearful aſſurances of your loyalty and love. And let our principal and moſt truſty friends named in my laſt know that I do. 

I would have thee, Jack, come down, as ſoon as thou canſt. I believe I ſhall not want the others ſo ſoon. Yet they may come down to Lord M's. I will be there, if not to receive them, to ſatisfy my Lord, that there is no new miſchief in hand, which will require his ſecond intervention. 

For thyſelf, thou muſt be conſtantly with me: Not for myſecurity:The family dare do nothing but bully: They bark only at diſtance: But for myentertainment:That thou mayſt, from the Latin and the Engliſh Claſſics, keep my love-ſick ſoul from drooping. 

Thou hadſt beſt come to me here, in thy old corporal's coat; thy ſervant out of livery; and to be upon a familiar foot with thee, as a diſtant relation, to be provided for by thy intereſt above; I mean not in heaven, thou mayſt be ſure. Thou wilt find me at a little alehouſe; they call it an inn; The White-Hart; moſt terribly wounded (but by the weather only) the ſign:—In a ſorry village; within five miles from Harlowe-Place. Every-body knows Harlowe-Place—For, like Verſailles, it is ſprung up from a dunghil, within every elderly perſon's remembrance: Every poor body, particularly, knows it: But that only for a few years paſt, ſince a certain angel has appeared there among the ſons and daughters of men. 

The people here, at the Hart, are poor, but honeſt; and have gotten it into their heads, that I am a man of quality in diſguiſe; and there is no reining-in their officious reſpect. There is a pretty little ſmirking daughter; ſeventeen ſix days ago: I call her my Roſe-bud: Her grandmother (for there is no mother), a good neat old woman, as ever filled a wicker-chair in a chimney-corner, has beſought me to be merciful to her. 

This is the right way with me. Many and many a pretty rogue had I ſpared, whom I did not ſpare, had my power been acknowleged, and my mercybeen in time implored. But th•Debellare ſuperbosſhould be my motto, were I to have a new one. 

This ſimple chit, (for there is a ſimplicity in her thou wilt be highly pleaſed with: All humble; all officious; all innocent—I love her for her humility, her officiouſneſs, and even for herinnocence) will be pretty amuſement to thee; while I combat with the weather, and dodge and creep about the walls and purlieus of Harlowe-Place. Thou wilt ſee in her mind, all that her ſuperiors have been taught to conceal, in order to render themſelves leſs natural, and more undelightful. 

But I charge thee, that thou do not (what I would not permit myſelf to do, for the world—I charge thee, that thou do not) crop my Roſe-bud. She is the only flower of fragrance, that has blown in this vicinage for ten years paſt; or will for ten years to come: For I have look'd backward to thehave-been's,and forward to thewill-be's; having but too much leiſure upon my hands in my preſent waiting. 

I never was ſo honeſt for ſo long together ſince my matriculation. It behoves me ſo to be—Some way or other, my receſs may be found out; and it will then be thought that my Roſe-bud has attracted me. A report in my favour, from ſimplicities ſo amiable, may eſtabliſh me; for the grandmother's relation to my Roſe-bud may be ſworn to: And the father is an honeſt poor man: Has no joy, but in his Roſe-bud.—O Jack! ſpare thou therefore (for I ſhall leave thee often alone; ſpare thou) my Roſe-bud!—Let the rule I never departed from, but it coſt me a long regret, be obſerved to my Roſe-bud! Never to ruin a poor girl, whoſe ſimplicity and innocence was all ſhe had to truſt to; and whoſe fortunes were too low to ſave her from the rude contempts of worſe minds than her own, and from an indigence extreme: Such an one will only pine in ſecret; and at laſt, perhaps, in order to refuge herſelf from ſlanderous tongues and virulence, beinduced to tempt ſome guilty ſtream, or ſeek an end in the knee-incircling garter, that, peradventure, was the firſt attempt of abandoned Love.—No defiances will my Roſe-bud breathe; noſelf-dependent,thee-doubting watchfulneſs (indirectly challenging thy inventive machinations to do their worſt), will ſhe aſſume. Unſuſpicious of her danger, the lamb's throat will hardly ſhun thy knife!—O be not thou the butcher of my lambkin! 

The leſs be thou ſo, for the reaſon I am going to give thee—The gentle heart is touched by Love! Her ſoft boſom heaves with a paſſion ſhe has not yet found a name for. I once caught her eye following a young carpenter, a widow neighbour's ſon, living (to ſpeak in her dialect)at the little white-houſe over the way:A gentle youth he alſo ſeems to be, about three years older than herſelf: Play-mates from infancy, till his eighteenth and her fifteenth year, furniſhed a reaſon for a greater diſtance in ſhew, while their hearts gave a better for their being nearer than ever: For I ſoon perceived the Love reciprocal: A ſcrape and a bow at firſt ſeeing his pretty miſtreſs; turning often to ſalute her following eye; and, when a winding lane was to deprive him of her ſight, his whole body turned round, his hat more reverently d'off'd, than before. This anſwered (for, unſeen, I was behind her) by a low courteſy, and a ſigh, that Johnny was too far off to hear!—Happy Whelp! ſaid I to myſelf!—I withdrew; and in tript my Roſe-bud, as if ſatisfied with the dumb ſhew, and wiſhing nothing beyond it. 

I have examined the little heart: She has made me her confident: She owns, ſhe could love Johnny Barton very well: And Johnny Barton has told her, He could love her better than any maiden he ever ſaw—But, alas! it muſt not be thought of. Why not be thought of?—She don't know!—And then ſhe ſighed: But Johnny has an aunt, who will givehim an hundred pounds, when his time is out; and her father cannot give her but a few things, or ſo, to ſet her out with: And tho' Johnny's mother ſays, ſhe knows not where Johnny would have a prettier, or notabler wife, yet—And then ſhe ſighed again—What ſignifies talking?—I would not have Johnny be unhappy, and poor for me!—For what good would that dome,you know, Sir! 

What would I give (—By my ſoul, my angel will indeed reform me, if her friends implacable folly ruin us not both!—What would I give) to have ſo innocent, and ſo good a heart, as either my Roſe-bud's, or Johnny's! 

I have a confounded miſchievous one—bynaturetoo, I think!—A good motion now-and-then riſes from it: But it dies away preſently—A love of intrigue!—An invention for miſchief!—A triumph in ſubduing!—Fortune encouraging and ſupporting!—And a conſtitution—What ſignifies palliating? But I believe I had been a rogue, had I been a plough-boy. 

But the devil's in this ſex! Eternal miſguiders! Who, that has once treſpaſſed, ever recovered his integrity? And yet where there is not virtue, which nevertheleſs we free-livers are continually plotting to deſtroy, what is there even in the ultimate of our wiſhes with them?—PreparationandExpectationare, in a manner, every-thing:Reflection,indeed, may be ſomething, if the mind be hardened above feeling the guilt of a paſttreſpaſs:But theFruition,what is there in that? And yet, That being the end, nature will not be ſatisfied without it. 

See what grave reflections an innocent ſubject will produce! It gives me ſome pleaſure to think, that it is not out of mypowerto reform: But then, Jack, I am afraid I muſt keep better company, than I do at preſent—For we certainly harden one another. But be not caſt down, my boy; there will be time enoughto give thee, and all thy brethren, warning to chooſe another leader: And I fanſy thou wilt be the man. 

Mean time, as I make it my rule, whenever I have committed a very capital enormity, to do ſome good, by way of atonement; and as I believe I am a pretty deal indebted on that ſcore, I intend, before I leave theſe parts (ſucceſsfully ſhall I leave them, I hope, or I ſhall be tempted to do double the miſchief by way of revenge, tho' not to my Roſe-bud any), to join an hundred pounds to Johnny's aunt's hundred pounds, to make one innocent couple happy.—I repeat, therefore, and for half-a-dozen moretherefores,ſpare thou my Roſe-bud. 

An interruption:—Another letter anon; and both ſhall go together. 

LETTER XXXV. Mr.LOVELACE,ToJOHN BELFORD,Eſq.
I HAVE found out by my watchful Spy almoſt as many of my charmer's motions, as thoſe of the reſt of her relations. It delights me to think how the raſcal is careſſed by the uncles and nephew; and let intotheirſecrets; yet proceeds all the time bymyline of direction. I have charged him, however, on forfeiture of his preſent weekly ſtipend, and my future favour, to take care, that neither my beloved, or any of the family, ſuſpect him: I have told him, that he may indeed watch her egreſſes and regreſſes; but that only to keep off other ſervants from her paths; yet not to be ſeen by her himſelf. 

The dear creature has tempted him, he toldthem,with a bribe(which ſhe never offered),to convey a letter(which ſhe never wrote)to Miſs Howe;he believes,with one incloſed(perhaps to me):But he declined it: And he begged they would take no notice of it toher.This brought him a ſtingy ſhilling; greatapplauſe; and an injunction followed it to all the ſervants, for the ſtricteſt look-out, leſt ſhe ſhould contrive ſome way to ſend it—And, about an hour after, an order was given him to throw himſelf in her way; and (expreſſing his concern for denying her requeſt) to tender his ſervice to her, and to bring them her letter: Which it will beproper for him to report,that ſhe has refuſed to give him. 

Now ſeeſt thou not, how many good ends this contrivance anſwers? 

In the firſt place, The Lady is ſecured by it, againſt her own knowlege, in the liberty allowed her of takeing her private walks in the garden: For this attempt has confirmed them in their belief, that now they have turned off her maid, ſhe has no way to ſend a letter out of the houſe: If ſhe had, ſhe would not have run the riſque of tempting a fellow who had not been in her ſecret: So that ſhe can proſecute, unſuſpectedly, her correſpondence with me, and Miſs Howe. 

In the next place, It will afford me an opportunity, perhaps, of a private interview with her, which I am meditating, let her take it as ſhe will; having found out by my Spy (who can keep off every-body elſe), that ſhe goes every morning and evening to a wood-houſe remote from the dwelling-houſe, under pretence of viſiting and feeding a ſet of Bantam-poultry, which were produced from a breed that was her grandfather's, and which for that reaſon ſhe is very fond of; as alſo of ſome other curious fowls brought from the ſame place. I have an account of all her motions here.—And as ſhe has owned to me in one of her letters that ſhe correſponds privately with Miſs Howe, I preſume it is by this way. 

The interview I am meditating, will produce her conſent, I hope, to other favours of the like kind: For, ſhould ſhe not chooſe the place I am expecting to ſee her in, I can attend her any-where in the rambling, Dutch-taſte garden, whenever ſhe will permitme that honour: For my implement, hight Joſeph Leman, has given me the opportunity of procuring two keys (one of which I have given him, for reaſons good) to the garden-door, which opens to the haunted coppice, as tradition has made the ſervants think it; a man having been found hanging in it about twenty years ago: And Joſeph, upon the leaſt notice, will leave it unbolted. 

But I was obliged to give him, previouſly, my honour, that no miſchief ſhall happen to any of my adverſaries, from this liberty: For the fellow tells me, that he loves all his maſters; and, only that he knows I am a man of honour; and that my alliance will do credit to the family; and, after prejudices are overcome, every body will think ſo; or he would not for the world act the part he does. 

There never was a rogue, who had not a ſalvo to himſelf for being ſo.—What a praiſe tohoneſty,that every man pretends to it, even at the inſtant that he knows he is purſuing the methods that will perhaps prove him a knave to the whole world, as well as to his own conſcience! 

But what this ſtupid family can mean, to make all this neceſſary, I cannot imagine. My REVENGE and my LOVE are uppermoſt by turns. If the latter ſucceed not, the gratifying of the former will be my only conſolation: And, by All that's good, they ſhall feel it; altho', for it, I become an exile from my native country for ever. 

I will throw myſelf into my charmer's preſence: I have twice already attempted it in vain. I ſhall then ſee what I may depend upon from her favour. If I thought I had no proſpect of that, I ſhould be tempted to carry her off.—That would be a rape worthy of a Jupiter! 

But all gentle ſhall be my movements: All reſpectful, even to reverence, my addreſs to her!—Her hand ſhall be the only witneſs to the preſſure of mylip—my trembling lip: Iknowit will tremble, if I do notbidit tremble. As ſoft my ſighs, as the ſighs of my gentle Roſe-bud. Bymyhumility will I inviteherconfidence: The lonelineſs of the place ſhall give me no advantage: To diſſipate her fears, and engage her rellance upon my honour for the future, ſhall be my whole endeavour: But little will I complain of, not at all will I threaten, thoſe who are continually threatening me: But yet with a view to act the part of Dryden's lion; To ſecure my Love, or to let looſe my vengeance upon my hunters. 

What tho' his mighty ſoul his grief contains?He meditates revenge, who leaſt complains:And, like a lion ſlumb'ring in his way,Or ſleep diſſembling, while he waits his prey,His fearleſs foes within his diſtance draws;Conſtrains his roaring, and contracts his paws:Till at the laſt, his time for fury found,He ſhoots with ſudden vengeance from the ground:The proſtrate vulgar paſſes o'er, and ſpares;But, with a lordly rage, his hunters tears.LETTER XXXVI. MiſsCLARISSA HARLOWE,To MiſsHOWE.
Sat. night, Mar. 18.I HAVE been frighted out of my wits—Still am in a manner out of breath.—Thus occaſion'd—I went down, under the uſual pretence, in hopes to find ſomething from you. Concern'd at my diſappointment, I was returning from the woodhouſe, when I heard a ruſtling, as of ſomebody behind a ſtack of wood. I was extremely ſurpris'd: But ſtill more, to behold a man coming from behind the furthermoſt ſtack. O thought I, at that moment, the ſin of a prohibited correſpondence! 

In the ſame point of time that I ſaw him, he beſoughtme, not to be frighted: And, ſtill nearer approaching me, threw open a horſeman's coat: And who ſhould it be but Mr. Lovelace! I could not ſcream out (yet attempted to ſcream, the moment I ſaw a man; and again, when I ſaw who it was) For I had no voice: And had I not caught hold of a prop, which ſupported the old roof, I ſhould have ſunk. 

I had hitherto, as you know, kept him at diſtance: And now, as I recover'd myſelf, judge of my firſt emotions, when I recollected his character from every mouth of my family; his enterpriſing temper; and found myſelf alone with him, in a place ſo near a bye-lane, and ſo remote from the houſe. 

But his reſpectful behaviour ſoon diſſipated theſe fears, and gave me others, leſt we ſhould be ſeen together, and information of it given to my brother: The conſequences of which, I could readily think, would be, if not further miſchief, an imputed aſſignation, a ſtricter confinement, a forfeited correſpondence with you, my beloved friend, and a pretence for the moſt violent compulſion: And neither the one ſet of reflections, nor the other, acquitted him to me for his bold intruſion. 

As ſoon therefore as I could ſpeak, I expreſs'd with the greateſt warmth my diſpleaſure; and told him, that he cared not how much he expoſed me to the reſentments of all my friends, provided he could gratify his own impetuous humour; and I commanded him to leave the place that moment: And was hurrying from him; when he threw himſelf in the way at my feet, beſeeching my ſtay for one moment; declaring, that he ſuffer'd himſelf to be guilty of this raſhneſs, as I thought it, to avoid one much greater:—For, in ſhort, he could not bear the hourly inſults he received from my family, with the thoughts of having ſo little intereſt in my favour, that he could not promiſe himſelf, that his patience and forbearancewould be attended with any other iſſue, than to loſe me for ever, and be triumphed over and inſulted upon it. 

This man, you know, has very ready knees. You have ſaid, that he ought, in ſmall points, frequently to offend, on purpoſe to ſhew what an addreſs he is maſter of. 

He run on, expreſſing his apprehenſions, that a temper ſo gentle and obliging, as he ſaid mine was, to every-body but him (and a dutifulneſs ſo exemplary inclining me to do my part to others, whether they did theirs or not by me), would be wrought upon in favour of a man ſet up in part to be reveng'd upon myſelf, for my grandfather's envied diſtinction of me; and in part to be reveng'd upon him, for having given life to one, who would have taken his; and now ſought to deprive him of hopes dearer to him than life. 

I told him, he might be aſſur'd, that the ſeverity and ill-uſage I met with would be far from effecting the intended end: That altho' I could, with great ſincerity, declare for a Single Life, which had always been my choice; and particularly, that if ever I marry'd, if they would not inſiſt upon the man I had an averſion to, it ſhould not be with the man they diſliked— 

He interrupted me here: He hoped, I would forgive him for it; but he could not help expreſſing his great concern, that, after ſo many inſtances of his paſſionate and obſequious devotion— 

And pray Sir, ſaid I, let me interrupt you in my turn:—Why don't you aſſert, in ſtill plainer words, the obligation you have laid me under by this your boaſted devotion? Why don't you let me know, in terms as high as your implication, that a perſeverance I have not wiſh'd for, which has ſet all my relations at variance with me, is a merit, that throws upon me the guilt of ingratitude, for not anſwering it as you ſeem to expect? 

I muſt forgive him, he ſaid, if he, who pretended only to a comparative merit (and otherwiſe thought no man living could deſerve me), had preſumed to hope for a greater ſhare in my favour, than he had hitherto met with, when ſuch men as Mr. Symmes, Mr. Wyerley, and now, laſtly, ſo vile a reptile as this Solmes, however diſcouraged by myſelf, were made his competitors. As to the perſeverance I mentioned, it was impoſſible for himnotto perſevere: But I muſt needs know, that werehenot in being, the terms Solmes had propoſed were ſuch, as would have involved me in the ſame difficulties with my relations that I now laboured under. He therefore took the liberty to ſay, that my favour to him, far from increaſing thoſe difficulties, would be the readieſt way to extricate me from them. They had made it impoſſible (he told me, with too much truth) to oblige them any way, but by ſacrificing myſelf to Solmes. They were well appriſed beſides of the difference between the two; one, whom they hoped to manage as they pleaſed; the other, who could and would protect me from every inſult; and who hadnaturalproſpects much ſuperior to my brother'sfooliſhviews, of a title. 

How comes this man to know ſo well all our foibles? But I more wonder, how he came to have a notion of meeting me in this place! 

I was very uneaſy to be gone; and the more as the night came on apace. But there was no getting from him, till I had heard a great deal more of what he had to ſay. 

As he hoped, that I would one day make him the happieſt man in the world, he aſſured me, that he had ſo much regard for my fame, that he would be as far from adviſing any ſtep that were likely to caſt a ſhade upon my reputation, (altho' That ſtep were to be ever ſo much in his own favour) as I would be to follow ſuch advice. But ſince I was not to be permittedto live ſingle, he would ſubmit it to my conſideration, whether I had any way butoneto avoid the intended violence to my inclinations: My father ſo jealous of his authority: Both my uncles in my father's way of thinking: My couſin Morden at a diſtance: My uncle and aunt Hervey aw'd intoinſignificance,was his word: My brother and ſiſter inflaming every one; Solmes's offers captivating: Miſs Howe's mother rather of party with them, for motives reſpecting example to her own daughter. 

And then he aſk'd me, if I would receive a letter from his aunt Lawrance, on this occaſion: For his aunt Sadleir, he ſaid, having lately loſt her only child, hardly looked into the world, or thought of it farther, than to wiſh him marry'd, and, preferably to all the women in the world, with me. 

To be ſure, my dear, there is a great deal in what the man ſaid:—I may be allow'd to ſay This, without an imputedgloworthrob.—But I told him, nevertheleſs, that altho' I had great honour for the Ladies he was related to (for his two aunts in particular), yet I ſhould not chooſe to receive a letter on a ſubject, that had a tendency to promote an end I was far from intending to promote: That it became me, ill as I was treated at preſent, tohopeeverything, tobearevery-thing, and totryevery-thing: When my father ſaw my ſteadfaſtneſs, and that I would die rather than have Mr. Solmes, he would perhaps recede.— 

Interrupting me, he repreſented the unlikelihood there was of that, from the courſes they had enter'd upon; which he thus enumerated:—Their engaging Mrs. Howe againſt me, in the firſt place, as a perſon I might have thought to fly to, if puſh'd to deſperation:—My brother continually buzzing in my father's ears, that my couſin Morden would ſoon arrive, and then would inſiſt upon giving me poſſeſſion of my grandfather's eſtate, in purſuance of the will; which would renderme independent of my father:—Their diſgraceful confinement of me:—Their diſmiſſing ſo ſuddenly my ſervant, and ſetting my ſiſter's over me:—Their engaging my mamma, contrary to her own judgment, againſt me: Theſe, he ſaid, were all ſo many flagrant proofs, that they would ſtick at nothing to carry their point; and were what made him inexpreſſibly uneaſy. 

He appealed to me, whether ever I knew my papa recede from any reſolution he had once fix'd; eſpecially, if he thought either his prerogative, or his authority, concern'd in the queſtion. His acquaintance with our family, he ſaid, enabled him to give ſeveral inſtances (but they would be too grating to me) of an arbitrarineſs that had few examples even in the families of princes: An arbitrarineſs, which the moſt excellent of women, my mamma, too ſeverely experienced. 

He was proceeding, as I thought, with reflections of this ſort; and I angrily told him, I would not permit my father to be reflected upon; adding, That his ſeverity to me, however unmerited, was not a warrant for me to diſpenſe with my duty to him. 

He had no pleaſure, he ſaid, in urging any thing that could beſoconſtrued; for, however well warrantedhewas to make ſuch reflections, from the provocations they were continually giving him, he knew how offenſive tomeany liberties of this ſort would be.—And yet he muſt own, that it was painful to him, who had youth and paſſions to be allow'd for, as well as others; and who had always valued himſelf upon ſpeaking his mind; to curb himſelf, under ſuch treatment. Nevertheleſs, his conſideration for me would make him confine himſelf in his obſervations, to facts, that were too flagrant, and too openly avowed, to be diſputed. It could not thereforejuſtlydiſpleaſe, he would venture to ſay, if he made this natural inference from the premiſes, That if ſuch were my father's behaviour to awife,who diſputed not the imaginaryprerogativehe was ſo unprecedently fond of aſſerting, what room had a daughter to hope, he would depart from anauthorityhe was ſo earneſt, and ſo much more concern'd, to maintain? family-intereſts at the ſame time engaging; an averſion, however cauſeleſsly conceived, ſtimulating; my brother's and ſiſter's reſentments and ſelfiſh views co-operating; and my baniſhment from their preſence depriving me of allperſonalplea or intreaty in my own favour. 

How unhappy, my dear, that there is but too much reaſon for theſe obſervations, and for this inference; made, likewiſe, with more coolneſs and reſpect to my family than one would have apprehended from a man ſo much provok'd, and of paſſions ſo high, and generally thought uncontroulable!— 

Will you not queſtion me aboutthrobsandglows,if, from ſuch inſtances of a command over his fiery temper, for my ſake, I am ready to infer, that were my friends capable of a reconciliation with him, he might be affected by arguments apparently calculated for his preſent and future good? 

He repreſented to me, that my preſent diſgraceful confinement was known to all the world: That neither my ſiſter nor brother ſcrupled to repreſent me as an obliged and favoured child, in a ſtate of actual rebellion:—That, nevertheleſs, every-body who knew me was ready to juſtify me for an averſion to a man, whom every-body thought utterly unworthy ofme,and more fit for myſiſter:That unhappy as he was, in not having been able to make any greater impreſſion upon me in his favour, all the world gave me to him:—Nor was there but one objection made to him, by his very enemies (his birth, his fortunes, his proſpects all unexceptionable, and the latter ſplendid); andthat,he thank'd God, and my example, was in a fair way of being removed for ever: Since he had ſeen his error, and was heartily ſick of the courſes he had follow'd; which, however, were far leſs enormous thanmalice and envy had repreſented them to be. But of This he ſhould ſay the leſs, as it were much better to juſtify himſelf by his actions, than by the moſt ſolemn aſſeverations, and promiſes: And then complimenting myperſon,he aſſured me (for that he alwayslovedvirtue, altho' he had not follow'd its rules, as he ought), that he was ſtill more captivated with the graces of mymind:And would frankly own, that till he had the honour to know me, he had never met with an inducement ſufficient to enable him to overcome an unhappy kind of prejudice to matrimony; which had made him before impenetrable to the wiſhes and recommendations of all his relations. 

You ſee, my dear, he ſcruples not to ſpeak of himſelf, as his enemies ſpeak of him. I can't ſay, but his openneſs in theſe particulars gives a credit to his other profeſſions. I ſhould eaſily, I think, detect an hypocrite: Andthisman particularly, who is ſaid to have allowed himſelf in great liberties, were he to pretend to inſtantaneous lights and convictions—at his time of life too: Habits, I am ſenſible, are not ſo eaſily changed. You have always join'd with me in remarking, that he will ſpeak his mind with freedom, even to a degree of unpoliteneſs ſometimes; and that his very treatment of my family is a proof that he cannot make a mean court to any body for intereſt ſake.—What pity, where there are ſuch laudable traces, that they ſhould have been ſo mired, and choaked up, as I may ſay!—We have heard, that the man's head is better than his heart: But do you really think Mr. Lovelace can have averybad heart? Why ſhould not there be ſomething inbloodin the human creature, as well as in the ignobler animals? None of his family are exceptionable—but himſelf, indeed. The Ladies characters are admirable. But I ſhall incur the imputation I wiſh to avoid. Yet what a look of cenſoriouſneſs does it carry, to take one to taſk for doing that juſtice, and making thoſe charitableinferences in favour of one particular perſon, which one ought without ſcruple to do, and to make, in the behalf of any other man living? 

He then again preſs'd, that I would receive a letter from his aunt Lawrance of offer'd protection. He ſaid, that people of birth ſtood a little too much upon punctilio; as people of virtue alſo did: (—But indeed Birth, worthily liv'd up to, was Virtue; Virtue, Birth; the inducements to a decent punctilio the ſame; the origin of both, one [How came this notion from him!])—: Elſe, his aunt would write tome:But ſhe would be willing to be firſt appris'd, that her offer would be well receiv'd—as it would have the appearance of being made againſt the liking of one part of my family; and which nothing would induce her to make, but the degree of unworthy perſecution which I actually labour'd under, and had further reaſon to apprehend. 

I told him, that, however greatly I thought myſelf obliged to Lady Betty Lawrance, if This offer came from herſelf; yet it was eaſy to ſee to what it led. It might look like vanity in me, perhaps, to ſay, That this urgency in him, on this occaſion, wore the face of art, in order to engage me into meaſures I might not eaſily extricate myſelf from. I ſaid, that I ſhould not be affected by the ſplendor of even a Royal title.Goodneſs,I thought, wasGreatneſs:That the excellent characters of the Ladies of his family weigh'd more with me, than the conſideration that they were half-ſiſters to Lord M. and daughters of an Earl: That he would not have found encouragement from me, had my friends beenconſentingto his addreſs, if he had only amererelative merit to thoſe Ladies: Since, in that caſe, the very reaſons that made me admirethem,would have been ſo many objections to theirkinſman. 

I then aſſur'd him, that it was with infinite concern, that I had found myſelf drawn into an epiſtolarycorreſpondence with him; eſpecially ſince that correſpondence had been prohibited:—And the only agreeable uſe I could think of making of this unexpected and undeſired interview, was, to let him know, that I ſhould from henceforth think myſelf obliged to diſcontinue it. And I hoped, that he would not have thethoughtof engaging me to carry it on, by menacing my relations. 

There was light enough to diſtinguiſh, that he looked very grave upon this. He ſo much valued myfreechoice, he ſaid, and myunbias'dfavour (ſcorning to ſet himſelf upon a foot with Solmes, in the compulſory methods uſed in that man's behalf), that he ſhould hate himſelf, were he capable of a view of intimidating me by ſo very poor a method. But, nevertheleſs, there were two things to be conſider'd: Firſt, That the continual outrages he was treated with; the ſpies ſet over him, one of which he had detected; the indignities all his family were likewiſe treated with; as alſo, myſelf, avowedly in malice to him, or he ſhould not preſume to take upon himſelf to reſent for me, without my leave [The artful wretch ſaw he would have lain open here, had he not thus guarded]: All theſe conſiderations called upon him to ſhew a proper reſentment: And he would leave it to me to judge, whether it would be reaſonable for him, as a man of ſpirit, to bear ſuch inſults, if it were not for my ſake. I would be pleaſed to conſider, in the next place, whether the ſituation I was in (a priſoner in my father's houſe, and my whole family determined to compel me to marry a man unworthy of me; and that ſpeedily, and whether I conſented or not) admitted of delay in the preventive meaſures he was deſirous to put me upon,in the laſt reſort only.Nor was there a neceſſity, he ſaid, if I were actually in Lady Betty's protection, that I ſhould be his, if I ſhould ſee any thing objectible in his conduct, afterwards. 

But what would the world conclude would be the end, I aſked him, were I to throw myſelf into the protection ofhisfriends, but that it was with ſuch a view? 

And what leſs did the world thinknow,he aſked, than that I was confined that Imight not?You are to conſider, Madam, you have not now an option; and to whom it is owing that you have not; and that you are in the power of thoſe (Parents why ſhould I call them?) who are determin'd, that you ſhallnothave an option. All I propoſe is, that you will embrace ſuch a protection;—but not till you have try'd every way, to avoid the neceſſity for it. 

And give me leave to ſay, that if a correſpondence, on which I have founded all my hopes, is, at this critical conjuncture, to be broken off; and if you are reſolved not to be provided againſt the worſt; it muſt be plain to me, that you will at laſt yield to That worſt—Worſt tomeonly—It cannot be toyou—Andthen!(and he put his hand clenched to his forehead) how ſhall I bear the ſuppoſition?—Thenwill you be That Solmes's!—But, by all that's Sacred, neither he, nor your brother, nor your uncles, ſhall enjoy their triumph:—Perdition ſeize my ſoul, if they ſhall! 

The man's vehemence frighten'd me: Yet, in reſentment, I would have left him; but, throwing himſelf at my feet again, Leave me not thus, I beſeech you, deareſt Madam, leave me not thus, in deſpair. I kneel not, repenting of what I have vow'd in ſuch a caſe as That I have ſuppoſed. I re-vow it, at your feet!—And ſo he did. But think not it is by way of menace, or to intimidate you to favour me. If your heart inclines you [and then he aroſe] to obey your father (yourbrother,rather), and to have Solmes, altho' I ſhall avenge myſelf on thoſe who have inſulted me, for their inſults to myſelf and family; yet will I tear out my heart from This boſom (if poſſible, withmy own hands), were it to ſcruple to give up its ardors to a woman capable of ſuch a preference. 

I told him, that he talked to me in very high language; but he might aſſure himſelf, that I never would have Mr. Solmes (Yet that this I ſaid not in favour to him): And I had declared as much to my relations, were there not ſuch a man as himſelf in the world. 

Would I declare, that I would ſtill honour him with my correſpondence?—He could not bear, that, hoping to obtaingreaterinſtances of my favour, he ſhould forfeit theonly onehe had to boaſt of. 

I bid him forbear raſhneſs or reſentment to any of my family, and I would, for ſome time at leaſt, till I ſaw what iſſue my preſent trials were likely to have, proceed with a correſpondence, which, nevertheleſs, my heart condemned.— 

And his ſpirit him, the impatient creature ſaid, interrupting me, for bearing what he did; when he conſidered, that the neceſſity of it was impoſed upon him; not bymywill; for then he would bear it chearfully, and a thouſand times more; but by creatures—And there he ſtopp'd. 

I told him plainly, that he might thank himſelf (whoſe indifferent character, as to morals, had given ſuch a handle againſt him) for all. It was but juſt, that a man ſhould be ſpoken evil of, who ſet no value upon his own reputation. 

He offer'd to vindicate himſelf: But I told him, I would judge him by his own rule—by hisactions,not by hisprofeſſions. 

Were not his enemies, he ſaid, ſo powerful, and ſo determined; and had they not already ſhewn their intentions in ſuch high acts of evencruelcompulſion; but would leave me to my choice, or to my deſire of living ſingle; he would have been content to undergo a twelvemonth's probation, or more: But he was confident, that one month would either complete all their purpoſes, or render them abortive: And I beſtknew what hopes I had of myfather's receding: He did not know him, if I hadany. 

I ſaid, I would try every method, that either my duty or my influence upon any of them ſhould ſuggeſt, before I would put myſelf into any other protection. And, if nothing elſe would do, would reſign the envied eſtate; and that I dared to ſay would. 

He was contented, he ſaid, to abide that iſſue. He ſhould be far from wiſhing me to embrace any other protection, but, as he had frequently ſaid, in the laſt neceſſity. But, deareſt creature, ſaid he, catching my hand with ardor, and preſſing it to his lips, if the yielding up that eſtate will do—Reſign it;—and be mine—And I will corroborate, with all my ſoul, your reſignation!—This was not ungenerouſly ſaid, my dear! But what will not theſe men ſay to obtain belief, and a power over one? 

I made many efforts to go; and now it was ſo dark, that I began to have great apprehenſions—I cannot ſay from his behaviour: Indeed, he has a good deal raiſed himſelf in my opinion, by the perſonal reſpect, even to reverence, which he paid me during the whole conference: For altho' he flam'd out once, upon a ſuppoſition that Solmes might ſucceed, it was upon a ſuppoſition that would excuſe paſſion, if any thing could, you know, in a man pretending to love with fervor; altho' it was ſo levell'd, that I could not avoid reſenting it. 

He recommended himſelf to my favour at parting, with great earneſtneſs, yet with as great ſubmiſſion; not offering to condition any thing with me; altho' he hinted his wiſhes for another meeting: Which I forbid him ever attempting again in the ſame place.—And I'll own to you, from whom I ſhould be really blameable to conceal any thing, that his arguments (drawn from the diſgraceful treatment I meet with) of what Iamto expect, make me begin to apprehend, that I ſhall be under an obligation to be either the oneman's or the other's—And if ſo, I fancy I ſhall not incur your blame, were I to ſay,whichof the two it muſt be. You have ſaid, which it muſtnotbe. But, O my dear, the Single Life is by far the moſt eligible to me:Indeedit is. And I yet hope to obtain the bleſſing of making that option. 

I got back without obſervation: But the apprehenſion that I ſhould not, gave me great uneaſineſs; and made me begin my letter in a greater flutter than he gave me cauſe to be in, except at the firſt ſeeing him; for then, indeed, my ſpirits failed me; and it was a particular felicity, that, in ſuch a place, in ſuch a fright, and alone with him, I fainted not away. 

I ſhould add, That having reproached him with his behaviour the laſt Sunday at church, he ſolemnly aſſured me, That it was not what had been repreſented to me: That he did notexpectto ſee me there: But hoped to have an opportunity to addreſs himſelf to my father, and to be permitted to attend him home. But that the good Dr. Lewin had perſuaded him not to attempt ſpeaking to any of the family, at that time; obſerving to him the emotions his preſence had put every-body in. He intended no pride, or haughtineſs of behaviour, he aſſured me; and that the attributing ſuch to him was the effect of that ill-will which he had the mortification to find inſuperable: Adding, That when he bowed to my mamma, it was a compliment he intended generally to every one in the pew, as well as toher,whom he ſincerely venerated. 

If he may be believed (and I ſhould think he would not have come purpoſely to defy my family, yet expect favour from me), one may ſee, my dear, the force of hatred, which miſrepreſents all things:—Yet why ſhould Shorey (except officiouſly to pleaſe her principals) make a report in his disfavour? He told me, That he would appeal to Dr. Lewin for his juſtification on this head; adding, that the whole converſation between them turned upon his deſire to attempt to reconcilehimſelf to us all, in theface of the Church; and, upon the Doctor's endeavouring to diſſuade him from making ſuch a public overture, till he knew how it would be accepted. But, alas! I am debarred from ſeeing that good man, or any one who would adviſe me what to do in my preſent difficult ſituation!— 

I fancy, my dear, however, that there would hardly be a guilty perſon in the world, were eachſuſpectedoraccuſedperſon to tell his or her own ſtory, and be allowed any degree of credit. 

I have written a very long letter. To be ſo particular as you require, in ſubjects of converſation, it is impoſſible to be ſhort. I will add to it only the aſſurance, That I am, and ever will be, 

Your affectionate and faithful friend and ſervant, CL. HARLOWE.You'll be ſo good, my dear, as to remember, that the date of your laſt letter to me, was the 9th of this inſtant March. 

LETTER XXXVII. MiſsHOWE,To MiſsCLARISSA HARLOWE.
Sunday, March 19.I Beg your pardon, my deareſt friend, for having given you occaſion to remind me of the date of my laſt. I was willing to have before me as much of the workings of yourwiſerelations as poſſible; being verily perſuaded, that one ſide or the other would have yielded by this time: And then, I ſhould have had ſome degree of certainty to found my obſervations upon. And indeed, what can I write, that I have not already written?—You know, that I can do nothing but rave at your ſtupid perſecutors:And That you don't like. I have adviſed you to reſume your own eſtate: That you won't do. You cannot bear the thoughts of having their Solmes: And Lovelace is reſolved you ſhall be his, let who will ſay to the contrary. I think you muſt be either the one man's or the other's. Let us ſee what theirnextſtep will be. As to Lovelace, while he tells his own ſtory; having behaved ſo handſomely on his intruſion in the woodhouſe; and intended ſo well at Church; who can ſay, That the man is in theleaſtblameworthy?—Wicked people!to combine againſt ſoinnocenta man!—But, as I ſaid, Let us ſee what theirnextſtep will be, and what courſe you will take upon it; and then we may be more inlighten'd. 

As to your change of ſtyle to your uncles, and brother, and ſiſter, ſince they were ſo fond of attributing to you a regard for Lovelace, and would not be perſuaded to the contrary; and ſince you only ſtrengthened their arguments againſt yourſelf by denying it; you did but juſt as I would have done, in giving way to their ſuſpicions; and trying what That would do—But if—But if—Pray, my dear, indulge me a little—Youyourſelfthink it was neceſſary to apologize tomefor that change of ſt•le tothem—And till you will ſpeak out like a friend to her un-queſtion-able friend, I muſt teaze you a little—Let it run, therefore; for it will run— 

If, then, there be not a reaſon for this change of ſtyle, which you have not thought fit to give me, be ſo good as to watch, as I once before adviſed you, how the cauſe for it will come on: Why ſhoul•it be permitted to ſteal upon you, and you know nothing of the matter? 

When a perſon gets a great cold, he or ſhe puzzles, and ſtudies, how it began; how he—ſhe got it: And when that is accounted for, down he—ſhe ſits contented, and lets it have its courſe, or takes a ſweat, or the like, to get rid of it, if it be very troubleſome.—So, my dear, before the malady you wot of, yet wotnotof, grows ſo importunate, as that you muſt be obliged to ſweat it out, let me adviſe you to mind how it comes on. For I am perſuaded, as ſurely as that I am now writing to you, that their indiſcreet violence on one hand, and his inſinuating addreſs on the other, if the man be not a greater fool than any body thinks him, will effectually bring it to This, and do all his work for him. 

But let it—If it muſt be Lovelace or Solmes, the choice cannot admit of debate.—Yet, if all be true that is reported, I ſhould prefer almoſt any of your other lovers to either; unworthy astheyalſo are. But who, indeed, can be worthy of Miſs Clariſſa Harlowe? 

I wiſh you don't tax me of harping too much upon one ſtring. I ſhould, indeed, think myſelf inexcuſable ſo to do (the rather, as I am ſo bold, as to imagine it is a point out of all doubt, from fifty places in your letters, were I to labour the proof), if you would ingenuouſly own— 

Own what? you'll ſay. Why, my Anna Howe, I hope, you don't think, that I am already in love!— 

No, to be ſure! How can your Anna Howe have ſuch a thought?—Love, tho' ſoſhort a word,has abroad ſoundwith it. What then ſhall we call it? You have help'd me to a phraſe that has anarrower ſoundwith it; but a prettybroadmeaning, nevertheleſs: Aconditional kind of liking!—that's it.—O my friend! Did I not know how much you deſpiſe Prudery; and that you are too young, and too lovely to be a Prude— 

But, avoiding ſuch hard names, let me tell you one thing, my dear (which nevertheleſs I have told you before); and that is This, That I ſhall think I have reaſon to be highly diſpleaſed with you, if, when you write to me, you endeavour to keep from me any Secret of your heart. 

Let me add, That if you would clearly and explicitlytell me, how far Lovelacehas,or hasnot,a hold in your affections, I could better adviſe you what to do, than at preſent I can. You, who are ſo famed for preſcience, as I may call it, and than whom no young Lady ever had ſtronger pretenſions to a ſhare of it; have had, no doubt, reaſonings in your heart about him, ſuppoſing you were to be one day his (No doubt but you have had the ſame in Solmes's caſe:—Whence the ground for the hatred of the one; and of theconditional likingof the other): Will you tell me, my dear, what you have thought of hisbeſtand of hisworſt?—How far eligible for thefirſt; how far rejectible for thelaſt?—Then weighing both parts in oppoſite ſcales, we ſhall ſee which is likely to preponderate; or rather whichdoespreponderate. Nothing leſs than the knowlege of the inmoſt receſſes of your heart, can ſatisfy my love and my friendſhip. Surely, you are not afraid to truſtyourſelfwith a ſecret of this nature: If you are, then you may themoreallowably doubtme.But I dare ſay, you will not own either: Nor is there, I hope, cauſe for either. 

Be pleaſed to obſerve one thing, my dear, that whenever I have given myſelf any of thoſe airs of raillery, which have ſeem'd to make you look about you (when, likewiſe, your caſe may call for a more ſerious turn from a ſympathizing friend), it has not been upon thoſe paſſages which are written, tho' perhaps notintended,with ſuch explicitneſs (don't be alarm'd, my dear!) as leaves one little cauſe of doubt: But only when you affect reſerve; when you give new words for common things; when you come with yourcurioſities,with yourconditional likings,and with your PRUDE-encies (mind how I ſpell the word) in a caſe, that with every other perſon defies all prudence—Overt-acts of treaſon, all theſe againſt the ſovereign friendſhip we have vowed to each other!— 

Remember, that you foundmeout in a moment.You challeng'd me. I owned directly, that there was only my pride between the man and me; for I could not endure, I told you, to think it in the power of any fellow living to give me a moment's uneaſineſs. And then my man, as I have elſewhere ſaid, was not ſuch a one as yours: So I had reaſon to impute full as much to my own inconſideration, as to hispowerover me: Nay,more.But ſtill more toyours.For you reaſon'd me out of thecurioſityfirſt; and when the liking was brought to beconditional—Why then, you know, Ithrobb'dno more about him. 

O!pray now,as you ſay, now I have mentioned that my fellow was not ſuch a charming fellow as yours, let Miſs Biddulph, Miſs Lloyd, Miſs Campion, and me, have your opinion, how farFigureought to engage us: With a view to your own caſe, however—Mind that—as Mr. T' Antony ſays—And whetherat all,if the man be vain of it; ſince, as you obſerve in a former, that vanity isa ſtop-ſhort pridein ſuch a one, that would make one juſtly doubt theworthineſs of his interior.You, our pattern, ſo lovely in feature, ſo graceful in perſon, have none of it; and have therefore with thebeſtgrace always held, that it is not excuſable even in a woman. 

You muſt know, that this ſubject was warmly debated among us in our laſt converſation, and Miſs Lloyd wiſhed me to write to you upon it for your opinion; to which, in every debated caſe, we always defered. I hope you will not be ſo much ingroſs'd by your more weighty cares, as not to have freedom of ſpirits enough to enter upon the taſk.—You know how much we all admire your opinion on ſuch topics; which ever produces ſomething new and inſtructive, as you handle the ſubjects. And pray tell us, to what you think it owing, that your man ſeems ſo careful to adorn that ſelf-adorned perſon of his; yet ſo manages, that one cannot for one's heart think him a coxcomb?—Let this queſtion, and the above taſks,divert, and not diſpleaſe you, my dear.—One ſubject, tho' ever ſo important, could never yet ingroſs your capacious mind. If they ſhould diſpleaſe you, you muſt recollect the many inſtances of my impertinence, which you have forgiven, and then ſay, This is a mad girl:—But yet I love her!—And ſhe is my own 

ANNA HOWE.LETTER XXXVIII. MiſsCLARISSA HARLOWE,To MiſsHOWE.
Monday, March 20.YOUR laſt ſo ſenſibly affects me, that I muſt poſtpone every other conſideration, however weighty, to reply to it: And this I will do very diſtinctly, and with all the openneſs of heart, which our mutual friendſhip demands. 

But let me obſerve, in the firſt place,gratefullyobſerve, That if I have infifty paſſagesof my letters given you ſuchundoubtedproofs of my value for Mr. Lovelace, that you have ſpared me for the ſake of myexplicitneſs,it is acting by me with a generoſity worthy of yourſelf. 

But lives the man, think you, who is ſo very bad, that he does not give even a doubting mind reaſon atonetime to be better pleaſed with him, than atanother?And when that reaſon offers, is it not juſt to expreſs one's ſelf accordingly? I would do the man who addreſſes me as muchjuſtice,as if he didnotaddreſs me: It has ſuch a look of tyranny, it appears ſo ungenerous, methinks, to uſe a man worſe for his reſpect to one (no other cauſe for diſreſpect occurring), that I would not by any means be that perſon who ſhould do ſo. 

But, altho' I may intend no more than juſtice, it will, perhaps, be difficult to hinder thoſe who know the man's views, from conſtruing it as a partialfavour: And eſpecially if the eager-ey'd obſerver has been formerly touch'd herſelf, and would triumph that her friend had been no more able to eſcape than ſhe!—Noble minds, emulative of perfection (and yet the paſſion, properly directed, I do not take to be anim-perfection neither), may be allow'd a little generous envy, I think! 

If I meant by this a reflection, by way of revenge, it is but a revenge, my dear, in the ſoft ſenſe of the word!—I love, as I have told you, your pleaſantry—Altho' at the time, it may pain one a little; yet on recollection, when one feels in the reproof more of the cautioning friend, than of the ſatirizing obſerver, an ingenuous mind will be all gratitude upon it. All the buſineſs will be This, I ſhall be ſenſible of the pain in the preſent letter perhaps; but I ſhall thank you in the next, and ever after. 

In this way, I hope, my dear, you will account for a little of that ſenſibility which you will find above, and perhaps ſtill more, as I proceed.—You frequently remind me, by thebeſt example,that I muſt not ſpareyou! 

I am not conſcious, that I have written any thing of this man, that has not been more in his diſpraiſe than in his favour. Suchisthe man, that I think I muſt have been faulty, and ought to take myſelf to account, if I had not: But if you think otherwiſe, I will not put you uponlabouring the proof,as you call it! My conduct muſt then have a faultyappearanceat leaſt, and I will endeavour to rectify it. But of this I aſſure you, That whatever interpretation my words were capable of, Iintended notany reſerve to you. I wrote my heart, at the time:—If I had had thoughts of diſguiſing it, or been conſcious, that there wasreaſonfor doing ſo; perhaps I had not given you the opportunity of remarking upon mycurioſityafter his relations eſteem for me; nor upon myconditional liking,and ſuch-like. All I intended by thefirſt, I believe I honeſtly told you at the time: To that letter I therefore refer, whether it make for me, or againſt me: And by the other, that I might bear in mind, what it became a perſon of my ſex and character tobeand todo,in ſuch an unhappy ſituation, where the imputed love is thought an undutiful, and therefore a criminal, paſſion; and where the ſuppoſed object of it is a man of faulty morals too. And I am ſure you will excuſe my deſire of appearing at thoſe times the perſon I ought to be; had I no other view in it, but to merit the continuance of your good opinion. 

But that I may acquit myſelf of having reſerves—O, my dear, I muſt here break off!— 

LETTER XXXIX. MiſsCLARISSA HARLOWE,To MiſsHOWE.
Monday, March 20.THIS letter will account to you, my dear, for my abrupt breaking off in the anſwer I was writing to yours of yeſterday; and which, poſſibly, I ſhall not be able to finiſh, and ſend you, till to-morrow or next day; having a great deal to ſay to the ſubjects you put to me in it. What I am now to give you are the particulars of another effort made by my friends, thro' the good Mrs. Norton. 

It ſeems they had ſent to her yeſterday, to be here this day, to take their inſtructions, and to try whatſhecould do with me. It would, at leaſt, I ſuppoſe they thought, have this effect; To render me inexcuſable withher; or to letherſee, that there was no room for the expoſtulations ſhe had often wanted to make in my favour to my mamma. 

The declaration, that my heart wasfree,afforded them an argument to prove obſtinacy and perverſeneſs upon me; ſince it could be nothing elſe that govern'dme in my oppoſition to their wills, if I had no particular eſteem for another man: And now, that I have given them reaſon (in order to obviate this argument) to ſuppoſe that Ihavea preference to another, they are reſolved to carry their ſchemes into execution as ſoon as poſſible. And in order to this, they ſent for This good woman, for whom they know I have even a filial regard. 

She found aſſembled my papa and mamma, my brother and ſiſter, my two uncles, and my aunt Hervey. 

My brother acquainted her with all that had paſſed ſince ſhe was laſt permitted to ſee me; with my letters avowing my regard to Mr. Lovelace, as they all interpreted them; with the ſubſtance of their anſwers to them; and with their reſolutions. 

My mamma ſpoke next; and delivered herſelf to this effect, as the good woman told me afterwards: 

After reciting how many times I had been indulged in my refuſals of different gentlemen; and the pains ſhe had taken with me, to induce me to oblige my whole family, in one inſtance out of five or ſix; and my obſtinacy upon it; O my good Mrs. Norton, ſaid the dear Lady, could you have thought, thatmyClariſſa andyourClariſſa was capable of ſo determin'd an oppoſition to the will of parents ſo indulgent to her? But ſee whatyoucan do with her. The matter is gone too far to be receded from, on our parts. Her papa had concluded every thing with Mr. Solmes, not doubting her compliance. Such noble ſettlements, Mrs. Norton, and ſuch advantages to the whole family!—In ſhort, ſhe has it in her power to lay an obligation upon us all. Mr. Solmes, knowing ſhe has good principles, and hoping, by his patiencenow,and good treatmenthereafter,to engage her gratitude, and by degrees her love, is willing to overlook All!— 

[Overlookall, my dear! Mr. Solmes tooverlookall! There's a word!] 

So, Mrs. Norton, if you are convinc'd, that it is a child's duty to ſubmit to her parents authority, in the moſt important point as well as in the leaſt, I beg you'll tryyourinfluence over her:Ihave none. Herpapahas none: Herunclesneither. Altho' it is her apparent intereſt to oblige us All; for, on that condition, her grandfather's eſtate is not half of what, living and dying, is purpos'd to be done for her. If any body can prevail with her, it isyou; and I hope you willheartilyenter upon this taſk with her. 

She aſk'd, Whether ſhe was permitted to expoſtulate with them upon the occaſion, before ſhe came up to me? 

My arrogant brother told her, ſhe was ſent for to expoſtulate with hisſiſter,and not withthem.AndThis,Goody Norton [She is alwaysGoodywith him!], you may tell her, that matters are gone ſo far with Mr. Solmes, that there is no going back!—Of conſequence, no room foryourexpoſtulation, orherseither. 

Be aſſured of This, Mrs. Norton, ſaid my papa, in an angry tone, that we will not be baffled by her. We will not appear like fools in This matter, and as if we had no authority over our own daughter. We will not, in ſhort, be bully'd out of our child by a curſed rake, who had like to have killed our only ſon!—And ſo ſhe had better make a merit of her obedience: For comply ſhe ſhall, if I live; independent as ſhe thinks my father's indiſcreet bounty hath made her of me, her father. Indeed ſince That, ſhe has never been what ſhe was before. An unjuſt bequeſt!—And it is likely to proſper accordingly!—But if ſhe marry that vile Lovelace, I will litigate every ſhilling with her: Tell her ſo; and that the Willmaybe ſet aſide, andſhall. 

My uncles join'd, with equal heat. 

My brother was violent in his declarations. 

My ſiſter put in with vehemence, on the ſame ſide. 

My aunt Hervey was pleaſed to ſay, There was no article ſo proper for parents to govern in, as This of marriage: And it was very fit, mine ſhould be obliged. 

Thus inſtructed, the good woman came up to me. She told me all that had paſſed; and was very earneſt with me to comply; and ſo much juſtice did ſhe to the taſk impoſed upon her, that I more than once thought, that her own opinion went with theirs. But when ſhe ſaw what an immoveable averſion I had to the man, ſhe lamented with me their determin'd reſolution: And then examin'd into the ſincerity of my profeſſion, that I would gladly compound with them by living ſingle: Of this being ſatisfy'd, ſhe was ſo convinc'd, that this offer (which would exclude Lovelace effectually) ought to be accepted, that ſhe would go down, altho' I told her, it was what I had tender'd over-and-over to no purpoſe, and undertake to be guaranty for me on that ſcore. 

She went accordingly; but ſoon return'd in tears; being uſed harſhly for urging this alternative:—They had a right to my obedience upon their own terms, they ſaid: My propoſal was an artifice, only to gain time: Nothing but marrying Mr. Solmesſhoulddo: They had told me ſo before: They ſhould not be at reſt till it was done; for they knew what an intereſt Lovelace had in my heart: I had as good as own'd it in my letters to my uncles, and brother, and ſiſter, altho' I had moſt diſingenuouſly declared otherwiſe to my mamma. I depended, they ſaid, upontheirindulgence, and myown powerover them: They had not baniſh'd me their preſence, if they did not know that their conſideration formewas greater than mine forthem.And theywouldbe obey'd, or I never ſhould be reſtor'd to their favour, let the conſequence be what it would. 

My brother thought fit to tell the good woman, that her whining nonſenſe did but harden me. There was a perverſeneſs, he ſaid, in female minds, a Tragedy-pride, that would make a romantic young creature, ſuch a one as me, riſque any thing to obtain pity. I was of an age, and a turn (the inſolent ſaid), to be fond of a lover-like diſtreſs: And my grief (which ſhe pleaded) would never break my heart; it would ſooner break That of the beſt and moſt indulgent of mothers. He added, That ſhe might once more go up to me: But that, if ſhe prevailed not, he ſhould ſuſpect, that the man they all hated had found a way to attachherto his intereſt. 

Every-body blam'd him for this unworthy reflection; which greatly affected the good woman. But nevertheleſs he ſaid, and no-body contradicted him, that if ſhe could not prevail upon herſweet child(as it ſeems ſhe had fondly called me), ſhe had beſt withdraw to her own home, and there tarry till ſhe was ſent for; and ſo leave herſweet childto her father's management. 

Sure no-body ever had ſo inſolent, ſo hard-hearted a brother, as I have! So much reſignation to be expected from me! So much arrogance, and to ſo good a woman, and of ſo fine an underſtanding, to be allowed in him! 

She nevertheleſs told him, that however ſhe might be ridiculed for ſpeaking of the ſweetneſs of my diſpoſition, ſhe muſt take upon her to ſay, that there never was a ſweeter in the ſex: And that ſhe had ever found, that by mild methods, and gentleneſs, I might at any time be prevailed upon, even in points againſt my own judgment and opinion. 

My aunt Hervey hereupon ſaid, it was worth while to reflect upon what Mrs. Norton ſaid: And that ſhe had ſometimes allowedherſelfto doubt, whether I had been begun with by ſuch methods as generous tempers are only to be influenced by, in caſes wheretheir hearts are ſuppoſed to be oppoſite to the will of their friends. 

She had both my brother and ſiſter upon her for This: Who referr'd to my mamma, whether ſhe had not treated me with an indulgence that had hardly any example? 

My mamma ſaid, She muſt own, that no indulgence had been wanting fromher:But ſhe muſt needs ſay, and hadoftenſaid it, that the reception I met with on my return from Miſs Howe, and the manner in which the propoſal of Mr. Solmes was made to me (which was ſuch as left nothing to my choice), and before I had had an opportunity to converſe with him, were not what ſhe had by any means approved of. 

She was ſilenc'd, you will gueſs by whom,—with, My dear! my dear!—You haveeverſomething to ſay, ſomething to palliate, for this rebel of a girl!—Remember her treatment of you, of me!—Remember, that the wretch, whom we ſo juſtly hate, would not dare to perſiſt in his purpoſes, but for her encouragement ofhim,and obſtinacy tous.—Mrs. Norton (angrily to her), go up to her once more—and if you think gentleneſs will do—you have a commiſſion to be gentle.—If it won't, never make uſe of that plea again. 

Ay, my good woman, ſaid my mamma, tryyourforce with her. My ſiſter Hervey and I will go up to her, and bring her down in our hands, to receive her father's bleſſing, and aſſurances of every-body's love, if ſhe will be prevailed upon: And, in that caſe, we will all love you the better for your good offices. 

She came up to me, and repeated all theſe paſſages with tears:—But, after what had paſſed between us, I told her, that ſhe could not hope to prevail upon me to comply with meaſures ſo wholly my brother's; and ſo much to my averſion.—And then folding me to her maternal boſom, I leave you, my deareſt Miſs, ſaidſhe!—I leave you, becauſe Imuſt!—But let me beſeech you to do nothing raſhly; nothing unbecoming your character. If all be true that is ſaid, Mr. Lovelace cannot deſerve you. If youcancomply, remember it is yourdutyto comply. They take not, I own, the right method with ſo generous a ſpirit. But remember, that there would not be any merit in your compliance, if it werenotto be againſt your own will. Remember alſo, what is expected from a character ſo extraordinary as yours: Remember, it is in your power to unite or diſunite your whole family for ever. Altho' it ſhould atpreſentbe diſagreeable to you to be thus compelled, your prudence, I dare ſay, when you conſider the matter ſeriouſly, will enable you to get over all prejudices againſt the one, and all prepoſſeſſions in favour of the other: And then the obligation you will lay all your family under, will be not only meritorious in you, with regard tothem,but in a few months, very probably, highly ſatisfactory, as well as reputable, toyourſelf. 

Conſider, my dear mamma Norton, ſaid I,onlyconſider, that it is not a ſmall thing that is inſiſted upon; nor for a ſhort duration: It is for myLife.—Conſider too, that all This is owing to an overbearing brother, who governs every-body. Conſider how deſirous I am to oblige them, if aſingle•ife,and breaking all correſpondence with the man they hate becauſe my brother hates him, would do it. 

I conſider every-thing, my deareſt Miſs: And, added to what I have ſaid, doyouonly conſider, that if, by purſuing yourownwill, and rejectingtheirs,youſhouldbe unhappy, you will be deprived of all that conſolation which thoſe have, who have been directed by theirparents,altho' the event prove not anſwerable to their wiſhes. 

Imuſtgo, repeated ſhe;—your brother will ſay (and ſhe wept), that I harden you by mywhining nonſenſe.'Tis indeed hard, that ſo much regard ſhouldbe paid to thehumoursof one child; and ſo little to theinclinationof another. But let me repeat, that it is yourdutyto acquieſce, if youcanacquieſce: Your father has given your brother's ſchemeshisſanction; and they are nowhis.Mr. Lovelace, I doubt, is not a man that will juſtifyyourchoice, ſo much as he willtheirdiſlike. It is too eaſy to ſee that your brother has aviewin diſcrediting you with all your friends, with your uncles in particular: But for that very reaſon, you ſhould comply, if poſſible, in order to diſconcert his ungenerous meaſures. I will pray for you; and that is all I can do for you. I muſt now go down, and make a report, that you are reſolved never to have Mr. Solmes:—Muſt I?—Conſider, Miſs,—MuſtI? 

Indeed you muſt!—But of This I do aſſure you, that I will do nothing to diſgrace the part you have had in my education. I will bear every-thing, that ſhall be ſhort of forcing my hand intohis,who never can have any ſhare in my heart. I will try, by patient duty, by humility, to overcome them. But death will I chooſe, in any ſhape, rather than That man. 

I dread to go down, ſaid ſhe, with ſo determin'd an anſwer: They will have no patience with me.—But let me leave you with one obſervation, which I beg of you always to bear in mind:— 

'That perſons of prudence, and diſtinguiſhed talents, like yours, ſeem to be ſprinkled thro' the world, to give credit, by their example, to Religion and Virtue. When ſuch perſonswilfullyerr, how great muſt be the fault! How ungrateful to that God, who bleſſed them with ſuch talents! What a loſs likewiſe to the world! What a wound to Virtue! But this, I hope, will never be to be ſaid of Miſs Clariſſa Harlowe!' 

I could give her no anſwer, but by my tears. And I thought, when ſhe went away, the better half of my heart went with her. 

I liſtened to hear what reception ſhe would meet with below; and found it was juſt ſuch a one as ſhe apprehended. 

Willſhe, or will ſhenot,be Mrs. Solmes? None of your whining circumlocutions, Mrs. Norton!—(You may gueſs who ſaid this.)—Willſhe, or will ſhenot,comply with her parents will? 

This cut ſhort all ſhe was going to ſay. 

If Imuſtſpeak ſo briefly, Miſs will ſooner die, than have— 

Any-body but Lovelace! interrupted my brother—This, Madam, This, Sir, is your meek daughter! This is Mrs. Norton'sſweet child!—Well, Goody, you may return to your own habitation. I am impowered to forbid you to have any correſpondence with this perverſe girl, for a month to come, as you value the favour of our whole family, or of any individual of it. 

And ſaying this, uncontradicted by any-body, he himſelf ſhewed her to the door—No doubt, with all that air of cruel inſult, which the haughty Rich can put on to the unhappy Low, who have not pleaſed them. 

So here, Miſs, am I deprived of the advice of one of the moſt prudent and conſcientious women in the world, were I to have ever ſo much occaſion for it. 

I might, indeed, write, as I preſume, under your cover, and receiveheranſwers to what I ſhould write. But ſhould ſuch a correſpondence be charged upon her, I know ſhe would not be guilty of a falſhood for the world; nor even of an equivocation: And ſhould ſhe own it, after this prohibition, ſhe would forfeit my mamma's favour for ever. And in my dangerous fever, ſome time ago, I engaged my mamma to promiſe me, that, if I died before I could do any-thing for the good woman, ſhe would ſet her above want for the reſt of her life, ſhould her eyes fail her, or ſickneſs befal her, and ſhe could not provide for herſelf, as ſhe now ſo prettily does by her fine needleworks, &c. 

What meaſures will they fall upon next?—Will they not recede, when they find, that it muſt be a rooted antipathy, and nothing elſe, that could make a temper, not naturally inflexible, ſo ſturdy? 

Adieu, my dear. Be you happy!—Toknowthat it is in your power to be ſo, is all that ſeems wanting to make you ſo. 

CL. HARLOWE.LETTER XL. MiſsCLARISSA HARLOWE,To MiſsHOWE.[In continuation of the ſubject in LetterXXXVIII.]
I WILL now, tho' midnight (for I have no ſleep in my eyes), reſume the ſubject I was forced ſo abruptly to quit; and will obey yours, Miſs Lloyd's, Miſs Campion's, and Miſs Biddulph's call, with as much temper as my divided thoughts will admit. The dead ſtillneſs of this ſolemn hour will, I hope, contribute to calm my diſturbed mind. 

In order to acquit myſelf of ſo heavy a charge as that of having reſerves to ſo dear a friend, I will acknowlege (and I thought I had over and over), that it is owing to my particular ſituation, if Mr. Lovelace appears to me in a tolerable light: And I take upon me to ſay, that had they oppoſed to him a man of ſenſe, of virtue, of generoſity; one who enjoy'd his fortune with credit; who had a tenderneſs in his nature for the calamities of others, which would have given a moral aſſurance, that he would have been ſtill leſs wanting in grateful returns to an obliging ſpirit:—Had they oppoſed ſuch a man as this to Mr. Lovelace, and been as earneſt to have me marry'd, as now they are, I do not know myſelf, if they would have had reaſon to tax me with that invincible obſtinacy which they lay to my charge: And this, whatever had been theFigureof the man: Since theHeartis what we women ſhould judge by in the choice we make, as the beſtſecurity for the party's good behaviour in every relation of life. 

But, ſituated as I am, thus perſecuted, and driven; I own to you, that I have now and then had a little more difficulty than I wiſh'd for, in paſſing by Mr. Lovelace's tolerable qualities, to keep up my diſlike to him for his others. 

You ſay, I muſt have argued with myſelf in his favour, and in his disfavour, on a ſuppoſition, that I might poſſibly be one day his. I own, that I have: And thus called upon by my deareſt friend, I will ſet before you both parts of the argument. 

And firſt,what occurred to me in his favour. 

At his introduction into our family, his negative virtues were inſiſted upon:—He was no gameſter; no horſe-racer; no fox-hunter; no drinker: My poor aunt Hervey had, in confidence, given us to apprehend much diſagreeable evil, eſpecially to a wife of the leaſt delicacy, from a wine-lover: And common ſenſe inſtructed us, that Sobriety in a man, is no ſmall point to be ſecured, when ſo many miſchiefs happen daily from exceſs. I remember, that my ſiſter made the moſt of this favourable circumſtance in his character, while ſhe had any hopes of him. 

He was never thought to be a niggard: Not even ungenerous: Nor, when his conduct came to be inquired into, an extravagant, or ſquanderer: His pride (ſo far was it a laudable pride) ſecured him from that. Then he was ever ready to own his errors: He was no jeſter upon ſacred things: Poor Mr. Wyerley's fault; who ſeemed to think, that there was wit in ſaying bold things, which would ſhock a ſerious mind. His converſation with us was always unexceptionable; even chaſtly ſo; which, be his actions what they would, ſhew'd him capable of being influenc'd bydecentcompany; and that he might probably therefore be aledman, rather than aleader,inother.And one late inſtance, ſo late as laſt Saturday evening, has raiſedhim not a little in my opinion, with regard to this point of good (and, at the ſame time, of manly) behaviour. 

As to the advantage of birth, that is of his ſide, above any man who has been found out for me: If we may judge by that expreſſion of his, which you was pleaſed with at the time;'That upontruequality, andhereditarydiſtinction, if good ſenſe were not wanting, honour ſat as eaſy as his glove:'That, with as familiar an air, was his familiar expreſſion;'while none but the proſperous upſtart, MUSHROOM'D into rank (another of his peculiars) was arrogantly proud of it.'If, I ſay, we may judge of him by this, we ſhall conclude in his favour, that he knows what ſort of behaviour is to be expected from perſons of Birth, whether he act up to it or not. Conviction is half way to amendment. 

His fortunes in poſſeſſion are handſome; in expectation, ſplendid: So nothing need be ſaid on that ſubject. 

But it is impoſſible, ſay ſome, that he ſhould make a tender or kind huſband. Thoſe who are for impoſing upon me ſuch a man as Mr. Solmes, and by methods ſo violent, are not intitled to make this objection: But now, on this ſubject, let me tell you how I have argued with myſelf—For ſtill you muſt remember, that I am upon the extenuating part of his character. 

A great deal of the treatment a wife may expect from him, will, poſſibly, depend upon herſelf. Perhaps ſhe muſtpractiſe,as well aspromiſe,obedience to a man ſo little uſed to controul; and muſt be careful to oblige. And what huſband expects not this?—Themore,perhaps, if he has not reaſon to aſſure himſelf of the preferable love of his wife, before ſhe became ſuch. And how much eaſier and pleaſanter to obey the man of her choice, if he ſhould be even unreaſonable ſometimes, than one ſhe would not have had, could ſhe have avoided it? Then, I think, asthe men were the framers of the matrimonial office, and madeobediencea part of the woman's vow, ſhe ought not, even inpolicy,to ſhew him, that ſhe can break thro'herpart of the contract, however lightly ſhe may think of the inſtance; leſtheſhould take it into his head (himſelf is judge) to think as lightly of other points, whichſhemay hold more important. But indeed no point, ſo ſolemnly vow'd, can be ſlight. 

Thus principled, andactingaccordingly, what a wretch muſt that huſband be, who could treat ſuch a wife brutally!—Will Lovelace'swifebe the only perſon, to whom he will not pay the grateful debt of civility and good-manners? He is allow'd to be brave: Who ever knew a brave man, if a man ofſenſe,an univerſally baſe man? And how much the gentleneſs of ſex, and the manner of our training-up and education, make us need the protection of the brave, and the countenance of the generous, let the general approbation which we are all ſo naturally inclin'd to give to men of that character, teſtify. 

At worſt, will he confine me priſoner to my chamber? Will he deny me the viſits of my deareſt friend, and forbid me to correſpond with her? Will he take from me the Miſtreſly management, which I had not faultily diſcharged? Will he ſet a ſervant over me, with licence to inſult me? Will he, as he has not aſiſter,permit his couſins Montague, or would either of thoſe Ladiesacceptof a permiſſion, to inſult and tyrannize over me?—It cannot be.—Why then, think I often, do you tempt me, O my cruel friends, to try the difference? 

And then has the ſecret pleaſure intruded itſelf, to be able to reclaim ſuch a man to the paths of virtue and honour: To be aſecondarymeans, if I were to be his, of ſaving him, and preventing the miſchiefs ſo enterpriſing a creature might otherwiſe be guilty of, if he be ſuch a one. 

In theſe lights when I have thought of him (and that as a man of ſenſe he will ſooner ſee his errors, than another),I own to you, that I have had ſome difficulty to avoid taking the path they ſo violently endeavour to make me ſhun: And all that command of my paſſions, which has been attributed to me, as my greateſt praiſe, and, in ſo young a creature, as my diſtinction, has hardly been ſufficient for me. 

And let me add, that the favour of his relations (all but himſelf unexceptionable) has made a good deal of additional weight, thrown into the ſame ſcale. 

But now, in his disfavour.When I have reflected upon the prohibition of my parents: The giddy appearance, diſgraceful to ſex, that ſuch a preference would have: That there is no manner of likelihood, inflam'd by the rencounter, and upheld by art and ambition on my brother's ſide, that ever the animoſity will be got over: That I muſt therefore be at perpetual variance with all my own family: Muſt go tohim,and tohis,as an obliged, and half-fortun'd perſon: That his averſion to them all, is as ſtrong, as theirs to him; That his whole family are hated for his ſake; they hating ours in return: That he has a very immoral character as to our ſex: That knowing this, it is a high degree of impurity, to think of joining in wedlock with ſuch a man: That he is young, unbroken, his paſſions unſubdued: That he is violent in his temper; yet artful: I am afraid vindictive too: That ſuch an huſband might unſettle me in all my own principles, and hazard my future hopes: That his own relations, two excellent aunts, and an uncle, from whom he has ſuch large expectations, have no influence upon him: That what tolerable qualities he has, are ſounded more in pride than in virtue: That allowing, as he does, the excellency of Moral Precepts, and believing the doctrine of future Rewards and Puniſhments, he can live as if he deſpis'd the one, and defy'd the other: The probability that the taint ariſing from ſuch free principles, may go down into the manners of poſterity:That I knowing theſe things, and the importance of them, ſhould be more inexcuſable than one who knows them not; ſince an erroragainſtjudgment, is worſe, infinitely worſe, than an errorinjudgment:—Reflecting upon theſe things, I cannot help conjuring you, my dear, to praywithme, and to prayforme, that I may not be puſh'd upon ſuch indiſcreet meaſures, as will render me inexcuſabletomyſelf: For that is the teſt, after all; the world's opinion ought to be but a ſecondary conſideration. 

I have ſaid, in his praiſe, that he is extremely ready toown his errors:But I have ſometimes made a great drawback upon this article, in his disfavour; having been ready to apprehend, that this ingenuity may poſſibly be attributable to two cauſes, neither of them, by any means, creditable to him. The one, that his vices are ſo much his maſters, that heattemptsnot to conquer them; the other, that he may think it policy, to give upone halfof his character, to ſave theother,when thewholemay be blameable: By this means, ſilencing by acknowlegement the objections he cannot anſwer; which may give him the praiſe of ingenuouſneſs, when he can obtain no other; and when thechalleng'dproof might bring out, upon diſcuſſion, other evils. Theſe, you'll allow, are ſevere conſtructions; but every-thing his enemies ſay of him cannot be falſe. 

I will proceed by and by. 

SOMETIMES we have both thought him one of the moſt undeſigningmerelywitty men we ever knew; at other times one of the deepeſt creatures we ever convers'd with. So that, when in one viſit, we have imagin'd we fathom'd him, in the next, he has made us ready to give him up as impenetrable. This, my dear, is to be put among the ſhades in his character.—Yet, upon the whole, you have been ſo far of hisparty, that you have conteſted, that his principal fault is over-frankneſs, and too much regardleſneſs of appearances, and that he is too giddy to be very artful: You would have it, that atthe timehe ſays any thing good, he means what he ſpeaks; That his variableneſs and levity are conſtitutional, owing to ſound health, and to a ſoul and body, that was your obſervation, fitted for, and pleaſed with, each other. And hence you concluded, that could thisconſentaneouſneſs,as you call'd it, of corporal and animal faculties, be pointed by diſcretion; that is to ſay, could his vivacity be confined within the pale ofbutmoral obligations; he would be far from being rejectible as a companion for life. 

But I uſed then to ſay, and I ſtill am of opinion, that he wants aheart:And if he does, he wants every-thing. A wrongheadmay be convinc'd, may have a right turn given it: But who is able to give aheart,if a heart be wanting? Divine Grace, working a miracle, or next to a miracle, can only change a bad heart. Should not one fly the man who is butſuſpectedof ſuch a one?—What, O what, do parentsdo,when they precipitate a child, and make her think better than ſhe would otherwiſe think of a man of an indifferent character, in order to avoid another that is odious to her! 

I have ſaid, that I think him vindictive: Upon my word, I have ſometimes doubted, whether his perſeverance in his addreſſes to me, has not been the more obſtinate, ſince he has found himſelf ſo diſagreeable to my friends. From that time, I verily think he has been more fervent in them; yet courts them not; but ſets them at defiance. For this, indeed, he pleads diſintereſtedneſs (I am ſure he cannot politeneſs) and the more plauſibly, as he is apprized of the ability they have to make it worth his while to court them. 'Tis true, he has declared, and with too much reaſon, or there would be no enduringhim, that the loweſt ſubmiſſions on his part, would not be accepted; and to oblige me, has offered to ſeek a reconciliation with them, if I would give him hope of ſucceſs. As to his behaviour at church, the Sunday before laſt, I lay no ſtreſs upon that, becauſe I doubt there was too much outward pride in his intentional humility, or Shorey, who is not his enemy, could not have miſtaken it. 

I do not think him ſo deeply learn'd in human Nature, or in Ethics, as ſome have thought him. Don't you remember how he ſtared, at the following trite obſervations, which every moraliſt could have furniſh'd him with? Complaining, as he did, in a half-menacing ſtrain, of the obloquies raiſed againſt him—'That if he were innocent, he ſhould deſpiſe the obloquy: If not, revenge would not wipe off his guilt.''That nobody ever thought of turning a ſword into a ſponge!''That it was in his own power, by reformation of an error laid to his charge by an enemy, to make that enemy one of his beſt friends; and (which was the nobleſt revenge in the world)againſt his will; ſince an enemy would notwiſhhim to be without the faults he taxed him with.' 

But theintention,he ſaid, was the wound. 

How ſo, I aſk'd him, whenThatcannot wound without theapplication?'That the adverſary only held the ſword: He himſelf pointed it to his breaſt?—And why ſhould he reſent mortally that malice, which he might be the better for, as long as he lived?'—What could be the reading he has been ſaid to be maſter of, to wonder, as he did, at theſe obſervations? 

But, indeed, he muſt take pleaſure in revenge; and yet holds others to be inexcuſable for the ſame fault.—He is not, however, the only one who can ſee how truly blameable thoſe errors are in another, which they hardly think ſuch in themſelves. 

From theſe conſiderations; From theſeover-balances;it was, that I ſaid, in a former, that I would not be in Love with this man for the world: And it was going further than prudence would warrant, when I was for compounding with you, by the wordsconditional liking; which you ſo humorouſly railly. 

Well but, methinks you ſay, what is all this to the purpoſe? This is ſtill but reaſoning: But, if youarein Love, youare:And Love, like the vapours, is the deeper rooted for having no ſufficient cauſe aſſignable for its hold. And ſo you call upon me again, to have no reſerves, and ſo-forth. 

Why then, my dear, if you will have it, I think, that, with all his preponderating faults, I like him better than I ever thought I ſhould like him; and, thoſe faults conſider'd, better perhaps than Ioughtto like him. And, I believe, it is poſſible for the perſecution I labour under, to induce me to like him ſtill more:—Eſpecially while I can recollect to his advantage our laſt interview, and as every day produces ſtronger inſtances oftyranny,I will call it, on the other ſide.—In a word, I will frankly own (ſince you cannot think any thing I ſay too explicite), that were henowbut a moral man, I would prefer him to all the men I ever ſaw. 

So that This is butconditional likingſtill, you'll ſay.—Nor, I hope, is it more. I never was inLove; and whether This beit,or not, I muſt ſubmit toyou:—But will venture to think it, if it be, no ſuchmightymonarch, no ſuch unconquerable power, as I have heard it repreſented; and it muſt have met with greater encouragements than I think I have given it, to be ſoirreſiſtible.—Since I am perſuaded, that I could yet, without athrob,moſt willingly give up theoneman to get rid of theother. 

But now to be a little more ſerious with you: If, my dear, my particularly unhappy ſituationhaddriven (orledme, if you pleaſe,) into a liking of the man; and if that likinghad,in your opinion, inclined meto the otherL,ſhouldyou,whoſe mind is ſuſceptible of the moſt friendly impreſſions; who have ſuch high notions of the delicacy of ſex; and who actuallydoenter ſo deeply into the diſtreſſes of one you love; ſhouldyouhave puſhed ſo far that unhappy friend on ſo very nice a ſubject?—Eſpecially, when I aimed not (as you couldprove by fiftyinſtances, it ſeems), to guard againſt being found out. Had you raillied me by word of mouth in the manner you do, it might have been more in character; eſpecially, if your friend's diſtreſſes had been ſurmounted; and if ſhe had affected Prudiſh airs in revolving the ſubject: But to ſit down towriteit, as methinks I ſee you, with a gladden'd eye, and with all the archneſs of exultation—Indeed my dear (and I take notice of it, rather for the ſake of your own generoſity, than for my ſake; for, as I have ſaid, I love your raillery) it is not ſoverypretty; the delicacy of the ſubject, and the delicacy of your own mind, conſider'd. 

I lay down my pen, here, that you may conſider of it a little, if you pleaſe. 

I RESUME; to give you my opinion of the ſorce whichfigureorperſonought to have upon our ſex: And this I ſhall do bothgenerally,andparticularly,as to this man: Whence you will be able to collect how far my friends are in the right, or in the wrong, when they attribute a good deal of prejudice in favour of one man, and in disfavour of the other, on the ſcore of figure. But, firſt, let me obſerve, That they ſee abundant reaſon, on comparing Mr. Lovelace and Mr. Solmes together, to believe that thismaybe a conſideration with me; and therefore they believe itis. 

There is certainly ſomething very plauſible and attractive, as well as creditable to a woman'schoice,infigure.It gives a favourable impreſſion at firſt ſight, in which one wiſhes to be confirm'd: And if, upon further acquaintance, we find reaſon ſo to be,we are pleaſed with our own judgment, and like the perſon the better, for having given us cauſe to compliment our own ſagacity, in our firſt-ſighted impreſſions. But, nevertheleſs, it has been generally a rule with me, to ſuſpect a fine figure, both in man and woman; and I have had a good deal of reaſon to approve my rule. With regard tomeneſpecially; who ought to value themſelves rather upon their intellectual than perſonal qualities. For, as to our ſex, if a fine woman ſhould be led by the opinion of the world, to be vain and conceited upon her form and features; and that to ſuch a degree, as to have neglected the more material and moredurablerecommendations; the world will be ready to excuſe her; ſince a pretty fool, in all ſhe ſays, and in all ſhe does, will pleaſe, we know not why. 

But who would grudge this pretty fool her ſhort day! Since, with her ſummer's ſun, when her butterfly-flutters are over, and the winter of age and furrows arrives, ſhe will feel the juſt effects of having neglected to cultivate her better faculties; for then, like another Helen, ſhe will be unable to bear the reflection even of her own glaſs; and being ſunk into the inſignificance of amere old woman; ſhe will be intitled to the contempts which follow that character. While thediſcreet matron,who carriesup(we will not, in ſuch a one's caſe, ſaydown)into advanced life, the ever-amiable character of virtuous prudence, and uſeful experience, finds ſolid veneration take place of airy admiration, and more than ſupply the want of it. 

But for amanto be vain of his perſon, how effeminate? If ſuch a one has genius, it ſeldom ſtrikes deep into intellectual ſubjects. His cutſide uſually runs away with him. To adorn, and perhaps,intendingto adorn, to render ridiculous, that perſon, takes up all his attention. All he does isperſonal; that is to ſay,forhimſelf: All he admires,ishimſelf:And in ſpite of the corrections of the ſtage, which ſo often, and ſo juſtly expoſes a coxcomb, he generally dwindles down, and ſinks into that character; and, of conſequence, becomes the ſcorn of one ſex, and the jeſt of the other. 

This is generally the caſe of your fine figures and gay dreſſers of men: Whence it is, that I repeat, thatmere perſonin a man, is a deſpicable conſideration. But if a man,beſidesfigure, has learning, and ſuch talents, aswouldhave diſtinguiſh'd him, whatever were his form; then indeedperſonis an addition: And if he has not run too egregiouſly into ſelf-admiration; and if he has preſerved his morals, he is truly a valuable being. 

Mr. Lovelace has certainly taſte; and, as far as I am able to determine, he has judgment in moſt of the politer arts. But altho' he has a humorous way of carrying it off, yet one may ſee, that he values himſelf not a little, both on his perſon and his parts, and even upon his dreſs; and yet he has ſo happy an eaſe in the latter, that it ſeems to be the leaſt part of his ſtudy. And as to the former, I ſhould hold myſelf inexcuſable, if I were to add to his vanity by ſhewing the leaſt regard for what is too evidently ſo much his. 

And now, my dear, let me aſk you; Have I come up to your expectation? If I have not, when my mind is more at caſe, I will endeavour to pleaſe you better. For, methinks, my ſentences drag; my ſtyle creeps; my imagination is ſunk; my ſpirit ſerves me not; only to tell you, That whether I have little or much, it is all devoted to the commands of my dear Miſs Howe. 

CL. HARLOWE.Poſtſcript.
The inſolent Betty Barnes has juſt now fired me anew, by reporting to me the following expreſſions of the hideous creature, Solmes—'That he isſureof the coy girl; and that with little labour to himſelf.''That be I ever ſo averſe to him beforehand, he candepend upon my principles; and it will be a pleaſure to him to ſee by what pretty degrees I ſhall come-to.'[—Horrid wretch!]'That it was Sir Oliver's obſervation, who knew the world perfectly well, thatFearwas a better ſecurity thanLove,for a woman's good behaviour to her huſband; altho', for his part, to ſuch a fine creature, he would try what Love would do; for a few weeks at leaſt: Being unwilling to believe what the old Knight uſed to averr, That fondneſs ſpoils more wives than it makes good.' 

What think you, my dear of ſuch a wretch as this! tutor'd, too, by that old ſurlyMiſogyniſt,as he was deemed, Sir Oliver?— 

LETTER XLI. MiſsCLARISSA HARLOWE,To MiſsHOWE.
Tueſday, March 21.HOW willingly would my dear mamma ſhew kindneſs to me, were ſhe permitted! None of this perſecution ſhould I labour under, I am ſure, if that regard were paid to her prudence and fine underſtanding, which they ſo well deſerve. Whether oweing to her, or to my aunt, or to both, that a new trial was to be made upon me, I cannot tell; but this morning her Shorey deliver'd into my hand the following condeſcending letter.My dear girl,FOR ſo I muſt ſtill call you; ſincedearyou may be to me, in every ſenſe of the word—We have taken into particular conſideration, ſome hints that fell yeſterday from your good Norton, as if we had not, at Mr. Solmes's firſt application, treated you with that condeſcenſion, wherewith we have in all other inſtances treated you. If ithad been ſo,my dear, you were not excuſable to be wanting inyourpart, and to ſet yourſelf to oppoſe your father's will in a point he had enter'd too far into, to recede with honour.But all yet may be well. On your ſingle will, my child, depends all our preſent happineſs!— 

Your father permits me to tell you, that if you now at laſt comply with his expectations, all paſt diſobligations ſhall be bury'd in oblivion, as if they had never been: But withal, that this is the laſt time that that grace will be offer'd you. 

I hinted to you, you muſt remember, that patterns of the richeſt ſilks were ſent for. They are come: And as theyarecome, your papa, to ſhew how much he is determin'd, will have me ſend them up to you. I could have wiſh'd they might not have accompany'd this letter—But there is no great matter inthat.I muſt tell you, that your delicacy is not to bequiteſo much regarded, as I had once thought it deſerved to be. 

Theſe are the neweſt, as well as richeſt, that we could procure; anſwerable to our ſtation in the world; anſwerable to the fortune, additional to your grandfather's eſtate, deſigned you; and to the noble ſettlements agreed upon. 

Your papa intends you ſix ſuits (three of them dreſs'd) at his own expence. You have an intire new ſuit; and one beſides, which I think you never wore but twice. As the new ſuit is rich, if you chuſe to make That one of the ſix, your papa, will preſent you with an hundred guineas in lieu. 

Mr. Solmes intends to preſent you with a ſet of jewels. As you have your grandmother's and your own, if you chooſe to have the former new-ſet and to make them ſerve, his preſent will be made in money; a very round ſum—which will be given in full property to yourſelf; beſides a fine annual allowance for pin-money, as it is called. So that your objection againſt the ſpirit of a man you think worſe of than he deſerves, will have no weight; but you will be more independent than a wife of leſs diſcretion than we attribute to you, perhapsoughtto be. You know full well, that I, who firſt and laſt brought aſtill larger fortune into the family, than you will carry to Mr. Solmes, had not a proviſion made me of near This, that we have made for you.—Where people marry to their liking, terms are the leaſt things ſtood upon.—Yet ſhould I be ſorry if you cannot, to oblige us all, overcome a diſlike. 

Wonder not, Clary, that I write to you thus plainly and freely upon this ſubject. Your behaviour hitherto has been ſuch, that we have had no opportunity of entering minutely into the ſubject with you. Yet, after all that has paſſed between you and me in converſation, and between you and your uncles by letter, you have no room to doubt what is to be the conſequence.—Either, child, we muſt give upourauthority, or youyourhumour. You cannot expect the one: We have all the reaſon in the world to expect the other. You know I have told you more than once, that you muſt reſolve to have Mr. Solmes, or never to be looked upon to be our child. 

The draught of the ſettlements you may ſee whenever you will. We think there can be no room for objection to any of the articles. There is ſtill more in them in our family's favour, than was ſtipulated at firſt, when your aunt talk'd of them to you. More ſo, indeed, than we could have aſk'd. If, upon peruſal of them, you think any alteration neceſſary, it ſhall be made.—Do, my dear girl, ſend to me within this day or two, or ratheraſkme, for the peruſal of them. 

As a certain perſon's appearance at church ſo lately, and what he gives out every-where, make us extremely uneaſy, and as that uneaſineſs will continue while you are ſingle, you muſt not wonder that a ſhort day is intended. This-day-fortnight we deſign it to be, if you have no objection to make, that I ſhall approve of. But, if you determine as we would have you, and ſignify it to us, we ſhall not ſtand with you for a week or ſo. 

Your ſightlineſs of perſon, may perhaps make ſomethink this alliance diſparaging. But I hope you won't put ſuch a perſonal value upon yourſelf; if you do, it will indeed be the leſs wonder thatperſonſhould weigh with you, (however contemptible the conſideration!)—in another man.—Thus we parents, in juſtice, ought to judge: That our two daughters areequallydear and valuable to us: If ſo, why ſhouldClariſſathink that a diſparagement, whichArabellawould not (nor we for her) have thought any, had the addreſs been made to her?—You will know what I mean by this, without my explaining myſelf further. 

Signify to us, now, therefore, your compliance with our wiſhes.—And then there is an end of your confinement: An act of oblivion, as I may call it, ſhall paſs upon all your former refractorineſs: And you will once more make us happy in you, and in one another. You may, in this caſe, directly come down to your papa and me, in his ſtudy; where we will give you our opinions of the patterns, with our hearty forgiveneſs and bleſſings. 

Come, be a good child, as you uſed to be, my Clariſſa. I have (notwithſtanding your paſt behaviour, and the hopeleſneſs which ſome have expreſs'd of your compliance) undertaken this one time more for you. Diſcredit not my hopes, my dear girl. I have promiſed never more to interfere between yourfatherandyou,if this my moſt earneſt application ſucceed not. I expect you down, Love. Your papa expects you down. But be ſure don't let him ſee any thing unchearful in your compliance. If you come, I will claſp you to my fond heart, with as much pleaſure as ever I preſs'd you to it in my whole life. You don't know what I have ſuffer'd within theſe few weeks paſt; nor ever will be able to gueſs, till you come to be in my ſituation; which is that of a fond and indulgent mother, praying night and day, and ſtruggling to preſerve, againſt the attempts of more ungovernable ſpirits, the peace and union of her family. 

But, you know the terms. Come not near us, if you reſolve to be undutiful: But this, after what I have written, I hope you cannot be. 

If you come directly, and, as I ſaid,chearfully,as if your heart were in your duty (and you told me it wasfree,you know—) I ſhall then, as I ſaid, give you the moſt tender proofs, how much I am 

Your truly affectionate Mother. 

Think for me, my deareſt friend, how I muſt be affected by this letter; the contents of it ſo ſurpriſingly terrifying, yet ſo ſweetly urged!—O why, cry'd I to myſelf, am I obliged to undergo this ſevere conflict between a command that I cannot obey, and language ſo condeſcendingly moving!—Could I have been ſure of being ſtruck dead at the altar before the ceremony had given the man I hate a title to my vows, I think I could have ſubmitted to have been led to it. But to think of livingwith,and livingfor,a man one cannot abide, what a ſad thing is that!— 

And then, how could the glare of habit and ornament be ſuppoſed any inducement to one, who has always held, that the principal view of a good wife in the adorning of her perſon, ought to be, topreſervethe affection of her huſband, and todo creditto his choice; and that ſhe ſhould be evenfearfulof attracting the eyes ofothers?—In this view, muſt not the very richneſs of the patterns add to my diſguſts?—Great encouragement indeed, to think of adorning one's-ſelf to be the wife of Mr.Solmes!— 

Upon the whole, it was not poſſible for me to go down upon the preſcrib'd condition. Do you think it was?—And towrite,if my letter would have beenread,what could I write that would be admitted, and after what I had written and ſaid to ſo little effect? I walked backward and forward: I threw down with diſdain the patterns: Now to my cloſet retir'd I; then, quitting it, now threw I myſelf upon the Settee; nowupon this chair; now upon that; and then into one window, then into another—I knew not what to do!—And while I was in this ſuſpenſe, having again taken up the letter to re-peruſe it, Betty came in, reminding me, by order, That my papa and mamma waited for me in my papa's ſtudy. 

Tell my mamma, ſaid I, that I beg the favour of ſeeing her here for one moment; or to permit me to attend her any where by herſelf. 

I liſten'd at the ſtair's-head—You ſee, my dear, how it is, cry'd my father, very angrily: All your condeſcenſion (as your indulgence heretofore) is thrown away.You blame your ſon's violence,as you call it, [I had ſome pleaſure in hearing this] but nothing elſe will do with her. You ſhallnotſee her alone. Ismypreſence an exception to the bold creature? 

Tell her, ſaid my mamma to Betty, ſhe knows upon what terms ſhe may come down to us. Nor will I ſee her upon any other. 

The maid brought me this anſwer. I had recourſe to my pen and ink; but I trembled ſo, that I could not write, nor knew I what to ſay had I had ſteadier fingers. At laſt Betty brought me theſe lines from my papa.Undutiful and perverſe Clariſſa,NO condeſcenſion, I ſee, will move you. Your mother ſhallnotſee you; nor will I. Prepare, however to obey. You know our pleaſure. Your uncle Antony, your brother, and your ſiſter, and your favourite Mrs. Norton, ſhall ſee the ceremony performed privately at your ſaid uncle's chapel. And when Mr. Solmes can introduce you to us, in the temper we wiſh to behold you in, we may perhaps forgivehiswife, altho' we never can, in anyothercharacter, our perverſe daughter. As it will be ſo privately performed, cloaths and equipage may be provided afterwards. So prepare to go to your uncle's foran early-day in next week. We will not ſee you till all is over: And we will have it over the ſooner, in order to ſhorten the time of your deſerved confinement, and our own trouble, in contending with ſuch a rebel, as you have been of late. I'll hear no pleas. Will receive no letter, nor expoſtulation. Nor ſhall you hear from me any more till you have chang'd your name to my liking. This from 

Your incenſed Father. 

If this reſolution be adhered to, then will my papa never ſee me more!—For I will never be That Solmes's wife—I will die firſt!—Tueſday evening.HE, this Solmes, came hither ſoon after I had received my papa's letter. He ſent up to beg leave to wait upon me. I wonder at his aſſurance! 

I ſaid to Betty, who brought me his meſſage, Let him reſtore a loſt creature to her father and mother, and then I may hear what he has to ſay. But, if my friends will not ſeemeonhisaccount, I will not ſee him upon hisown. 

I hope, Miſs, ſaid Betty, that you will not ſend me down with this anſwer. He is with your papa and mamma. 

I am driven to deſpair, ſaid I. I cannot be uſed worſe. I will not ſee him. 

Down ſhe went with my anſwer. She pretended, it ſeems, to be loth to repeat it: So wascommandedout of her affected reſerves, and gave it in its full force. 

O how I heard my papa ſtorm!— 

They were all together, it ſeems, in his ſtudy. My brother was for having me turn'd out of the houſe that moment, to Lovelace, and my evil deſtiny. My mamma was pleaſed to put in a gentle word for me: I know not what it was: But thus ſhe was anſwer'd—My dear, this is the provoking'ſt thing in the world in a woman of your good ſenſe!—To love a rebel, as well as if ſhe were dutiful. What encouragement for duty is this?—Have I not loved her as well as ever you did, andwhyam I changed? Would to the Lord, your ſex knew how to diſtinguiſh? But the fond mother ever made a harden'd child!— 

She was pleaſed, however, to blame Betty, as the wench own'd, for giving my anſwer its full force. But my father praiſed her for it. 

The wench ſays, That he would have come up in his wrath, at my refuſing to ſee Mr. Solmes: But my brother and ſiſter prevailed upon him to the contrary. 

I wiſh he had!—And, were it not for his own ſake, that he had killed me. 

Mr. Solmes condeſcended (I am mightily obliged to him, truly!) to plead for me. 

They are all in tumults! How it will end, I know not!—I am quite weary of my life!—So happy, till within theſe few weeks!—So miſerable now! 

Well, indeed, might my mamma ſay, That I ſhould have great trials!— 

P. S.Theidiot(ſuch a one am I treated like!) isbegg'd,as I may ſay, by my brother and ſiſter. They have deſired, that I may be conſigned over intirely to their management. If it be granted (Itis,on my father's ſide, I underſtand, but notyeton my mother's) what cruelty may I not expect from their envy, jealouſy, and ill-will?—I ſhall ſoon ſee, by its effects, if I am to be ſo conſigned.—This is a written intimation privately dropt in my Wood-houſe-walk, by my couſin Dolly Hervey. The dear girl longs to ſee me, ſhe tells me: But is forbidden till ſhe ſee me as Mrs. Solmes, or conſenting to be his. I will take example bytheirperſeverance!—Indeed I will!— 

 

LETTER XLII. MiſsCLARISSA HARLOWE,To MiſsHOWE.
AN angry dialogue, a ſcolding-bout rather, has paſſed between my ſiſter and me. Did you think I could ſcold, my dear? 

She was ſent up to me, upon my refuſal to ſee Mr. Solmes—Let looſe upon me, I think!—No intention, on their parts, to conciliate! I am to be given up to my brother and her I ſuppoſe, by general conſent. 

Every thing ſhe ſaid againſt me, which carried force with it, I will do juſtice to. As I aſk for your approbation or diſapprobation of my conduct, upon the facts I lay before you, I ſhould think it the ſign of a very bad cauſe, if I endeavoured to miſlead my judge. 

She began with repreſenting to me the danger I had been in, had my father come up, as he would have done, had he not been hindered, by Mr.Solmes,among the reſt. She reflected upon my good Mrs. Norton, as if ſhe encouraged me in my perverſeneſs. She ridiculed me for my ſuppoſed eſteem for Lovelace. Was ſurpriſed that thewitty,theprudent,nay, thedutifulandpi-ous(ſo ſhe ſneeringly pronounced the word) Clariſſa Harlowe, ſhould be ſo ſtrangely fond of a profligate man, that her parents were forced to lock her up, to keep her from running into his arms. Let me aſk you, my dear, ſaid ſhe, how you now keep your account of the diſpoſition of your time? How many hours in the twenty-four do you devote to your Needle? How many to your Prayers? How many to Letter-writing? And how many to Love?—I doubt, I doubt, my little dear, was her arch expreſſion, The latter article is like Aaron's rod, and ſwallows up all the reſt!—Tell me; is it not ſo? 

To theſe I anſwered, That it was a double mortification to me to owe my ſafety from my papa's indignationto a man I could never thank for any thing.—I vindicated the good Mrs. Norton with a warmth that her merit required from me.—With equal warmth I reſented her unſiſterly reflections upon me on Mr. Lovelace's account. As to the diſpoſition of my time, in the twenty-four hours, I told her it would better have become her to pity a ſiſter in diſtreſs, than to exult over her—Eſpecially, when I could too juſtly attribute to the diſpoſition of ſome of her wakeful hours no ſmall part of that diſtreſs. 

She raved extremely at this laſt hint: But reminded me of the gentle treatment of all my friends, my mamma's particularly, before it came to This: She ſaid, that I had diſcovered a ſpirit they never had expected: That, if they hadthoughtme ſuch a championeſs, they would hardly have ventured to engage with me: But that now, the ſhort and the long was, that the matter had gone too far to be given up: That now it was a contention betweendutyandwilfulneſs; Whether a parent's authority was to yield to a daughter's obſtinacy, or the contrary: That I muſt therefore bend or break, that was all, child. 

I told her, that I wiſhed the ſubject were of ſuch a nature, that I could return her pleaſantry with equal lightneſs of heart: But that, if Mr. Solmes had ſuch merit in every-body's eye, inhersparticularly, why might he not be abrotherto me, rather than ahuſband? 

O child, ſhe thought I was as pleaſant to the full as ſhe was: She began to have ſome hopes of me now. But did I think ſhe would rob her ſiſter of her humble ſervant? Had he firſt addreſſed himſelf to me, ſaid ſhe, ſomething might have been ſaid: But to take my younger ſiſter's refuſal! No, no, child; it is not come to that neither! Beſides, That would be to leave the door open in your heart for you know who, child; and we would fain bar him out, if poſſible. In ſhort (and then ſhe changed both her tone, and her looks), had I been as forward as ſomebody, to throw myſelfinto the arms of one of the greateſt profligates in England, who had endeavoured to ſupport his claim to me thro' the blood of my brother, then might all my family join together to ſave me from ſuch a wretch, and to marry me as faſt as they could, to ſome worthy gentleman, who might oppor-tune-ly offer himſelf. And now, Clary, all's out, and make the moſt of it. 

Did not this deſerve a ſevere return? Do, ſay it did, to juſtify my reply.—Alas! for my poor ſiſter! ſaid I.—The man was notalwaysſo great a profligate. How true is the obſervation,That unrequited love turns to deepeſt hate! 

I thought ſhe would have beat me.—But I proceeded—I have heard often of my brother's danger, and my brother's murderer. When ſo little ceremony is made with me, why ſhould I not ſpeak out?—Did he not ſeek to kill theother,if he could have done it? Wouldhehave given himhislife, had it been in his power?—Theaggreſſorſhould notcomplain.—And, as to oppor-tuneoffers, would to heaven ſome one had offer'd oppor-tune-ly to ſomebody. It is not my fault, Bella, the oppor-tunegentleman don't come! 

Couldyou,my dear, have ſhewn moreſpirit?I expected to feel the weight of her hand. She did come up to me, with it held up: Then, ſpeechleſs with paſſion, ran down half way of the ſtairs, and then up again. 

When ſhe could ſpeak—God give her patience with me! 

Amen, ſaid I: But you ſee, Bella, how ill you bear the retort you provoke. Will you forgive me; and let me find a ſiſter in you, asIam ſorry, if you have reaſon to think me unſiſterly in what I have ſaid? 

Then did ſhe pour upon me, with greater violence; conſidering my gentleneſs as a triumph of temper overher. She was reſolved, ſhe ſaid, to let every-body know how I took the wicked Lovelace's part againſt my brother. 

I wiſh'd, I told her, I could make the plea formy-ſelf, which ſhe might forher-ſelf: That my anger was more inexcuſable than my judgment. But I preſumed ſhe had ſome other view in coming to me, than ſhe had hitherto acquainted me with. Let me, ſaid I, but know (after all that has paſſed) if you have anything to propoſe that Icancomply with; any thing that can make myonlyſiſter once more my friend? 

I had before, upon her ridiculing me on my ſuppoſed character ofmeekneſs,ſaid, that, altho' I wiſhed to be thoughtmeek,I would not beabject; altho'humble,notmean:And here, in a ſneering way, ſhe cautioned me on that head. 

I replied, that her pleaſantry was much more agreeable than her anger: But I wiſhed ſhe would let me know the end of a viſit that had hitherto(betweenus) been ſo unſiſterly? 

She deſired to be informed, in the name ofeverybody,was her word, what I was determined upon: And whether to comply or not?—One word for all: My friends were not to have patience with ſo perverſe a creature, for ever. 

This then I told her I would do: Abſolutely break with the man they were all ſo determined againſt: Upon condition, however, that neither Mr. Solmes, nor any other, were urged to me with the force of a command. 

And what was this, more than I had offered before? What, but ringing my changes upon the ſame bells, and neither receding nor advancing one tittle? 

If I knew what other propoſals I could make, that would be acceptable to them all, and free me from the addreſs of a man ſo diſagreeable to me, I would make them. I had indeed before offered, never to marry without my father's conſent— 

She interrupted me, That was becauſe I depended upon my whining tricks to bring my father and mother to what I pleaſed. 

Apoordependence! I ſaid:—She knew thoſe who would make that dependence vain— 

And Iſhouldhave brought them to my own beck, very probably, and my uncle Harlowe too, as alſo my aunt Hervey, had I not been forbidden their ſight, and thereby hindered from playing my pug's tricks before them. 

At leaſt, Bella, ſaid I, you have hinted to me to whom I am obliged, that my father and mother, and every-body elſe, treat me thus harſhly. But ſurely you make them all very weak. Indifferent perſons, judging of us two, from whatyouſay, would either thinkmea very artful creature, oryoua very ſpiteful one. 

You areindeeda very artful one, for that matter, interrupted ſhe in a paſſion: One of the artfulleſt I every knew! And then followed an accuſation ſo low! ſo unſiſterly!—That I next-to-bewitch'd people, by my inſinuating addreſs: That no-body could be valued or reſpected, but muſt ſtand like cyphers whereever I came. How often, ſaid ſhe, have I and my brother been talking upon a ſubject, and had everybody's attention, tillyoucame in, with your bewitchingmeekpride, andhumbleſignificance; and then have we either been ſtopped by references to Miſs Clariſſa's opinion, forſooth; or been forced to ſtop ourſelves, or muſt have talked on unattended to by every-body. 

She pauſed. Dear Bella, proceed!—She indeed ſeemed only gathering breath. 

And ſo I will, ſaid ſhe. Did you not bewitch my grandfather? Could any thing be pleaſing to him, thatyoudid not ſay or do? How did he uſe to hang, till he ſlabber'd again, poor doting old man! on your ſilver tongue! Yet what didyouſay, thatwecould not have ſaid? What didyoudo, thatwedid not endeavour to do?—And what was all this for? HisLaſt Will ſhewed what effect yourſmoothobligingneſs had upon him!—To leave the acquired part of his eſtate from the next heirs, his own ſons, to a grandchild; to hisyoungeſtgrandchild! adaughtertoo!—To leave the family-pictures from his ſons to you, becauſe you couldtiddleabout them, and, tho' you now neglect their examples, could wipe and clean them with your dainty hands! The family-plate too, in ſuch quantities, of two or three generations ſtanding, muſt not be changed, becauſe hisprecious childAlluding to his words in the preamble to the clauſes in his Will, in her favour.See p. 28., humouring his oldfal-laltaſte, admired it, to make it all her own. 

This was too low too move me: O my poor ſiſter! ſaid I: Not to be able, or at leaſt willing, to diſtinguiſh between art and nature! If Ididoblige, I was happy in it: I looked for no further reward: My mind is above art, from the dirty motives you mention. I wiſh with all my heart my grandfather had not thus diſtinguiſhed me: He ſaw my brother likely to be amply provided foroutof the family, as well asinit: He deſired thatyoumight have the greater ſhare of my papa's favour for it; and no doubt but youbothwill. You know, Bella, that the eſtate my grandfather bequeathedmewas not half the real eſtate he left. 

What's all that to an eſtate in poſſeſſion, and left you with ſuch diſtinctions, as gave you a reputation of greater value than the eſtate itſelf? 

Hence my misfortune, Bella, in your Envy, I doubt! But have I not given up that poſſeſſion in the beſt manner I could— 

Yes, interrupting me, ſhe hated me for thatbeſt manner.Specious little witch! ſhe called me: Yourbeſt manner,ſo full of art and deſign, had never been ſeen thro', if you, with your blandiſhing ways, had not been put out of ſight, and reduced to poſitive declarations!—Hindered from playing your little, whiningtricks; curling, like a ſerpent, about your mamma; and making her cry to deny you any thing your little obſtinate heart was ſet upon! 

Obſtinate heart, Bella! 

Yes, obſtinate heart! For did you ever give up any thing? Had you not the art to make them think all was right you aſked, tho' my brother and I were frequently refuſed favours of no greater import? 

I knew not, Bella, that I ever aſked any thing unfit to be granted. I ſeldom aſked favours formyſelf,but forothers. 

I was a reflecting creature for this! 

All you ſpeak of, Bella, was a long time ago. I cannot go ſo far back into our childiſh follies. Little did I think of how long ſtanding this your late-ſhewn antipathy is. 

I was a reflecter again! Such aſaucy meekneſs; ſuch abeſt manner; and ſuch venom in words!—O Clary! Clary! Thou wert always atwo-facedgirl! 

No-body thought I had two faces, when I gave up All into my papa's management; taking from his bounty, as before, all my little pocket-money, without a ſhilling addition to my ſtipend, or deſiring it— 

Yes, cunning creature!—And that was another of yourfetches!—For did it not engage my fond papa (as no doubt you thought it would) to tell you, that, ſince you had done ſo grateful and dutiful a thing, he would keep intire, for your uſe, all the produce of the eſtate left you, and be but your ſteward in it; and that you ſhould be intitled to the ſame allowances as before: Another of yourhook-in's,Clary!—So that all your extravagancies have been ſupported gratis. 

My extravagancies, Bella!—But did my papa ever give me any-thing he did not give you? 

Yes, indeed; I got more by that means, than I ſhould have had the conſcience to aſk. But I have ſtill the greater part to ſhew! Butyou!What haveyouto ſhew?—I dare to ſay, not fifty pieces in the world! 

Indeed I have not! 

I believe you!—Your mamma Norton, I ſuppoſe—But mum for that! 

Unworthy Bella!—The good woman, altho' low in circumſtance, is great in mind! Much greater than thoſe who would impute meanneſs to a ſoul incapable of it. 

What then have you done with the ſums given you from infancy to ſquander?—Let me aſk you (affecting archneſs), Has, has, has, Lovelace, has your Rake, put it out at intereſt for you? 

O that my ſiſter would not make me bluſh for her! Itis,however, out at intereſt!—And I hope it will bring me intereſt upon intereſt!—Better than to lie ruſting in my cabinet, as yours does. 

She underſtood me, ſhe ſaid. Were I a man, ſhe ſhould ſuppoſe I was aiming to carry the County. Popularity! A croud to follow me with their bleſſings, when I went to and from church, and no-body elſe to be regarded, were agreeable things! Houſe-top proclamations! Ihid not my light under a buſhel,ſhe would ſay that for me. But was it not a little hard upon me, to be kept from blazing on a Sunday?—And to be hindered from my charitable oſtentations? 

This, indeed, Bella, is cruel inyou,who have ſo largely contributed to my confinement.—But go on. You'll be out of breath by-and-by. I cannot wiſh to beableto return this uſage.—PoorBella! And I believe I ſmiled a little too contemptuouſly for a ſiſter. 

None of my ſaucy contempts (riſing in her voice): None of mypoor Bella's,with that air of ſuperiority in a younger ſiſter! 

Well then,richBella! courteſying—that will pleaſe you better—And it is due likewiſe to the hoards you boaſt of. 

Look-ye, Clary, holding up her hand, if you are not a little moreabjectin yourmeekneſs,a little moremeanin yourhumility,and tre•t me with the reſpect due to an elder ſiſter—you ſhall find— 

Not that you will treat me worſe than youhave done,Bella!—That cannot be; unleſs you were to let fall your uplifted hand upon me—And that would leſs become you todo,than me tobear. 

Good, meek creature!—But you were upon your overtures juſt now!—I ſhall ſurprize every-body by tarrying ſo long. They will think ſome good may be done with you—And ſupper will be ready. 

A tear would ſtray down my cheek—How happy have I been, ſaid I, ſighing, in the ſupper-time converſations, with all my dear friends in my eye, round the hoſpitable board! 

I met only with inſult for this—Bella has not a feeling heart: The higheſt joy in this life ſhe is not capable of: But then ſhe ſaves herſelf many griefs, by her impenetrableneſs.—Yet, for ten times the pain that ſuch a ſenſibility is attended with, would I not part with the pleaſure it brings with it. 

She aſked me, upon my turning from her, If ſhe ſhould ſay any thingbelowof mycompliances? 

You may ſay, That I will do every-thing they would have me do, if they will free me from Mr. Solmes's addreſs. 

This is all you deſire at preſent,creeper-on!(What words ſhe has!) But will not t'other man flame out, and roar moſt horribly, upon a prey's being ſnatch'd from his paws, that he thought himſelf ſure of? 

I muſt let you talk in your own way, or we ſhall never come to a point. I ſhall not matter hisroaring,as you call it: I will promiſe him, that, if I ever marry any other man, it ſhall not be tillheis married. And if he be not ſatisfied with ſuch a condeſcenſion as this, I ſhall think heought:And I will give any aſſurances, that I will neither correſpond with him, nor ſee him. Surely this will do. 

But I ſuppoſe then you will have no objection to ſee and converſe, on a civil foot, with Mr. Solmes—as your papa's friend, or ſo? 

No! I muſt be permitted to retire to my apartment whenever he comes: I would no more converſe with the one, than correſpond with the other: That would be to make Mr. Lovelace guilty of ſome raſhneſs, on a belief, that I broke with him, to have Mr. Solmes. 

And ſo, that wicked wretch is to be allowed ſuch a controul over you, that you are not to be civil to your papa's friends, at his own houſe, for fear of incenſinghim!—When this comes to be repreſented, be ſo good as to tell me, what it is you expect from it? 

Every-thing,I ſaid, ornothing,as ſhe was pleaſed to repreſent it.—Be ſo good as to give it your intereſt, Bella: And ſay farther, That I will by any means I can, in the Law, or otherwiſe, make over to my papa, to my uncles, or even to my brother, all I am intitled to by my grandfather's will, as a ſecurity for the performance of my promiſes. And as I ſhall have no reaſon to expect any favour from my papa, if I break them, I ſhall not be worth any-body's having. And further ſtill, unkindly as my brother has uſed me, I will go down to Scotland privately, as his houſekeeper (I now ſee I may be ſpared here), if he will promiſe to treat me no worſe than he would do an hired one.—Or I will go to Florence, to my couſin Morden, if his ſtay in Italy will admit of it: And, ineithercaſe, it may be given out, that I am gone to theother; or to the world's end: I care not whither it is ſaid I am gone, or do go. 

Let me aſk you, child, if you will give your pretty propoſal in writing? 

Yes, with all my heart. And I ſtept to my cloſet, and wrote to the purpoſe I have mentioned; and, moreover, a few lines to my brother with it; expreſſing'my concern for having offended him; beſeeching him to ſupport with his intereſt the accompanying propoſal; diſdaining ſubterfuge and art; referring to him to draw up a writing to bind me to the obſervance of my promiſes; declaring, that whatthelawwould not eſtabliſh, myreſolutionſhould.—I told him, That he could do more than any-body to reconcile my father and mother to me: And I ſhould be infinitely obliged to him, if he would let me owe this favour to his brotherly mediation.' 

And how do you think Bella employed herſelf while I was writing?—Why, playing gently upon my harpſichord: Andhummingto it, to ſhew her unconcernedneſs. 

When I approached her with what I had written, the cruel creature aroſe with an air of levity—Why, love, you have not written already!—You have, I proteſt!—O what a ready penwoman!—And may I read it? 

If you pleaſe, Bella. 

She read it; and burſt into an affected laugh: How wiſe-ones may be taken in!—Then you did not know, that I was jeſting with you all this time!—And ſo you would have me carry down this pretty piece of nonſenſe? 

Don't let me be ſurprized at your ſeeming unſiſterlineſs, Bella. I hope it isbutſeeming. There can benowit in ſuch jeſting as this. 

The folly of the creature! How natural it is for people, when they ſet their hearts upon any-thing, to think every-body muſt ſee with their eyes!—Pray, dear child,whatbecomes of your papa's authorityhere?—Whoſtoops here,theparent,or thechild?—How doesthisſquare with the engagements actually agreed upon between your Papa and Mr. Solmes? What ſecurity, that your Rake will not follow you to theworld's-end?—Pr'ythee, pr'ythee, take it back; and put it to thy love-ſick heart, and never think I will be laughed at for beingtaken-inby thy whining nonſenſe. I know thee better, my dear.—And, with another ſpiteful laugh, ſhe flung it on my toilette; and away ſhe went.—Contempts for contempts, as ſhe paſſed!—That's for yourpoor Bella's! 

Nevertheleſs, I incloſed what I had written, in a few lines directed to my brother: As modeſtly as I could, accounting, from my ſiſter's behaviour, for ſending it down to him; leſt ſhe, having, in her paſſion, miſtaken me, as I ſaid, ſhould ſet what I had written in a worſe light than, as I apprehended, it deſerved to appear in. The following is the anſwer I received to it, delivered to me juſt as I was going to bed. His paſſion would not let him ſtay till morning. 

To MiſsCLARISSA HARLOWE.
I Wonder that you have the courage to write to me, upon whom you are ſo continually emptying yourwhole female quiver.I have no patience with you, for reflecting upon me as the aggreſſor in a quarrel which owed its beginning to my conſideration foryou. 

You have made ſuch confeſſions in a villain's favour, as ought to cauſe all your relations to renounce you for ever. For my part, I will not believe any woman in the world, who promiſes againſt heravowedinclination. To put it out of yourpowerto ruin yourſelf, is the only way leſt to prevent your ruin. I did not intend to write; but your too-kind ſiſter has prevailed upon me. As to your going into Scotland, that day of grace is over!—Nor would I adviſe, that you ſhould go tograndfather-upyour couſin Morden. Beſides, that worthy gentleman might be involved in ſome fatal diſpute, upon your account; and then be called theaggreſſor. 

A fine ſituation you have brought yourſelf to, to propoſe to hide yourſelf from your Rake, and to have falſhoods told, to conceal you!—Your confinement, at this rate, is the happieſt thing that could befal you. Your Bravo's behaviour at church, looking out for you, is a ſufficient indication of his power over you, had you not ſo ſhameleſly acknowleged it. 

One word for all—If, for the honour of the family,I cannot carry this point, I will retire to Scotland, and never ſee the face of any one of it more. 

JA. HARLOWE.There's a brother!—There's flaming duty to a father, and mother, and uncles!—But he ſees himſelf valued, and made of conſequence; and he gives himſelf airs accordingly!— 

LETTER XLIII. MiſsCLARISSA HARLOWE,To MiſsHOWE.
Wedneſday morning, 9 o'clock.MY aunt Hervey lay here laſt night, and is but juſt gone from me. She came up to me with my ſiſter. They would not truſt my aunt without this ill-natur'd witneſs. When ſhe enter'd my chamber, I told her, That this viſit was a high favour to a poor priſoner, in her hard confinement. I kiſs'd her hand. She, kindly ſaluting me, ſaid, Why this diſtance to your aunt, my dear, who loves you ſo well? 

She own'd, That ſhe came to expoſtulate with me, for the peace ſake of the family: For that ſhe could not believe it poſſible, if I did not conceive myſelf unkindly treated, that I, who had ever ſhewn ſuch a ſweetneſs of temper, as well as manners, ſhould be thus reſolute, in a point ſovery nearto my father, and all my friends. My mamma and ſhe were both willing to impute my reſolution to the manner I had been begun with; and to my ſuppoſing, that my brother had originally more of a hand in the propoſals made by Mr. Solmes, than my father, or other friends. And fain would ſhe have furniſh'd me with an excuſe to come off of my oppoſition; Bella all the while humming a tune, and opening this book and that, without meaning; but ſaying nothing. After having ſhewed me, that my oppoſition could not be of ſignification,my father's honour being engaged, ſhe concluded with inforcing upon me my duty, in ſtronger terms than I believe ſhe would have done, the circumſtances of the caſe conſider'd, had not my ſiſter been preſent. It would but be repeating what I have ſo often mentioned, to give you the arguments that paſſed on both ſides. So I will only recite what ſhe was pleaſed to ſay, that carried with it the face of newneſs. 

When ſhe found me inflexible, as ſhe was pleaſed to call it, ſhe ſaid—For her part, ſhe could not but ſay, that if I were not to have either Mr. Solmes or Mr. Lovelace, and yet, to make my friends eaſy, muſt marry, ſhe ſhould not think amiſs of Mr. Wyerley. What did I think of Mr. Wyerley? 

Ay, Clary, put in my ſiſter, what ſay you to Mr. Wyerley? 

I ſaw thro' this immediately. It was ſaid on purpoſe, I doubted not, to have an argument againſt me of abſolute prepoſſeſſion in Lovelace's favour: Since Mr. Wyerley every-where proclaims his value, even to veneration, for me; and is far leſs exceptionable, both in perſon and mind, than Mr. Solmes: And I was willing to turn the tables, by trying how far Solme's terms might be diſpens'd with; ſince the ſame terms could not be expected from Mr. Wyerley? 

I therefore deſired to know, Whether my anſwer, if it ſhould be in favour of Mr. Wyerley, would releaſe me from Mr. Solmes?—For I own'd, that I had not the averſion tohim,that I had to theother. 

Nay, ſhe had no commiſſion to propoſe ſuch a thing—She only knew, that my papa and mamma would not be eaſy till Mr. Lovelace's hopes were intirely defeated. 

Cunning creature! ſaid my ſiſter.—And this, and her joining in the queſtion-before, confirm'd me, that it was a deſigned ſnare for me. 

Don't YOU, dear Madam, ſaid I, put queſtions that can anſwer no end, but to ſupport my brother'sſchemes againſt me.—But are there any hopes of an end to my ſufferings and diſgrace, without having this hated man impoſed upon me? Will not what I have offer'd be accepted? I am ſure it ought: I will venture to ſay That. 

Why, niece, if there benotany ſuch hopes, I preſume you don't think yourſelf abſolv'd from the duty due from a child to her parents? 

Yes, ſaid my ſiſter, I do not doubt but it is Miſs Clary's aim, if ſhe does not fly to her Lovelace, to get her eſtate into her own hands, and go to live atThe Grove,in that independence upon which ſhe builds all her perverſeneſs. And, dear heart! my little love, how will you then blaze away! Your mamma Norton your oracle, with your Poor at your gates, mingling ſoproudlyand ſomeanlywith the ragged herd! Reflecting, by your oſtentation, upon all the Ladies in the county, who do not as you do. This is known to be your ſcheme! And the Poorwithout-doors, and Lovelacewithin,with one hand building up a name, pulling it down with the other!—O what a charming ſcheme is this!—But let me tell you, my pretty little frighty one, that my papa'slivingWill ſhall controul my grandfather'sdeadone; and That eſtate will be diſpoſed of as my fond grandfather would have diſpoſed of it, had he lived to ſee ſuch a change in his favourite. In a word, Miſs, it will be kept out of your hands, till my papa ſees you diſcreet enough to have the management of it, or till you candutifully,by Law, tear it from him. 

Fie, Miſs Harlowe, ſaid my aunt, this is not pretty to your ſiſter. 

O Madam, let her go on. This is nothing to what I have borne from Miſs Harlowe. She is either commiſſioned to treat me ill by herenvy,or by anhigherauthority, to which I muſt ſubmit.—As to revoking the eſtate, what hinders, if I pleaſed? I know my power; but have not the leaſt thought ofexerting it. Be pleaſed to let my papa know, that, whatever be the conſequences to myſelf, were he to turn me out of doors (which I ſhould rather he would, than to be confined and inſulted as I am), and were I to be reduced to indigence and want, I would ſeek no reſources, that ſhould be contrary to his will. 

For that matter, child, ſaid my aunt, were you to marry, you muſt do as yourhuſbandwill have you. If that huſband be Mr. Lovelace, he will be glad of any opportunity of embroiling the families more. And let me tell you, niece, if he had the reſpect for you he pretends to have, he would not be upon ſuch defiances as he is. He is known to be a very revengeful man; and were Iyou,Miſs Clary, I ſhould be afraid he would wreak upon me that vengeance, tho' I had not offended him, which he is continually threatening to pour upon the family. 

Mr. Lovelace's threaten'd vengeance is inreturnfor threaten'd vengeance. It is not every-body will bear inſult, as, of late, I have been forced to bear it. 

O how my ſiſter's face ſhone with paſſion! 

But Mr. Lovelace, proceeded I, as I have ſaid twenty and twenty times, would be quite out of the queſtion, were I to be generouſly treated! 

My ſiſter ſaid ſomething with great vehemence: But only raiſing my voice, to be heard, without minding her, Pray, Madam, provokingly interrogated I, was he not known to have been as wild a man, when he wasat firſtintroduced into our family, as henowis ſaid to be? Yetthen,the common phraſes ofwild oats,andblack oxen,and ſuch-like, were qualifiers; and marriage, and the wiſe's diſcretion, were to perform wonders—But (turning to my ſiſter) I find I have ſai•too much. 

O thou wicked reflecter!—And what mademeabhor him, think you, but the proof of thoſe villainous freedoms that ought to have had the ſame effect upon you, were you but half ſo good a creature as you pretend to be? 

Proof,did you ſay, Bella! I thought you had notproof?—Butyou know beſt.[Was not this very ſpiteful, my dear?] 

Now, Clary, would I give a thouſand pounds to know all that is in thy little rancorous and reflecting heart, at this moment. 

I might let you know for a much leſs ſum, and not be afraid of being worſe treated than I have been. 

Well, young Ladies, I am ſorry to ſee things run ſo high between you. You know, niece (to me), you had not been confined thus to your apartment, could your mamma by condeſcenſions, or your papa by authority, have been able to have done any thing with you. But how can you expect, when there muſt be a conceſſion ononeſide, that it ſhould be on theirs? IfmyDolly, who has not the hundredth part of your underſtanding, were thus to ſet herſelf up in abſolute contradiction to my will, in a pointſomaterial, I ſhould not take it well of her—Indeed I ſhould not. 

I believe not, Madam: And if Miſs Hervey had juſt ſuch a brother, and juſt ſuch a ſiſter (youmaylook, Bella!)—and if both were to aggravate her parents, as my brother and ſiſter do mine—Then, perhaps, you might uſe her as I am uſed: And if ſhe hated the man you propoſed to her, and with as much reaſon as I do Mr. Solmes— 

[And loved a Rake and Libertine, Miſs, as you do Lovelace, ſaid my ſiſter—] 

Then might ſhe (continued I, not minding her) beg to be excuſed from obeying. But yet if ſhe did, and would give you the moſt ſolemn aſſurances, and ſecurity beſides, that ſhe never would have the man you diſliked, againſt your conſent—I dare ſay, Miſs Hervey's father and mother would ſit down ſatisfy'd, and not endeavour to force her inclinations. 

So!—ſaid my ſiſter, with uplifted hands,fatherandmothernow come in for their ſhare! 

But if, child, reply'd my aunt, I knew ſheloveda Rake,and ſuſpected, that ſhe ſought only to gain time, in order to wire-draw me into a conſent— 

I beg pardon, Madam, for interrupting you; but if Miſs Hervey couldobtainyour conſent, what further would be to be ſaid? 

True, child; but ſhe never ſhould. 

Then, Madam, it never would be. 

That I doubt, niece. 

If you do, Madam, can you think confinement and ill uſage is the way to prevent the apprehended raſhneſs? 

My dear, this ſort of intimation would make one but too apprehenſive, that there is no truſting to yourſelf, when one knows your inclination. 

That apprehenſion, Madam, ſeems to have been conceived before this intimation was made, or the leaſt cauſe for it given. Why elſe the diſgraceful confinement I have been laid under?—Let me venture to ſay, that my ſufferings are rather owing todeſignedterror, knowing there were too good grounds for my oppoſition, than doubt of my conduct; for, when they were inflicted upon me firſt, I had given nocauſeof doubt; nor ſhould there now be room for any, if my diſcretion might be truſted to. 

My aunt, after a little heſitation, ſaid, But, conſider, my dear, what confuſion will be perpetuated in your family, if you marry this hated Lovelace? 

And, let it be conſidered, what miſery to me, Madam, if I marry that hated Solmes? 

Many a young creature has thought ſhe could not love a man, with whom ſhe has afterwards been very happy. Few women, child, marry their firſt loves. 

That may be the reaſon there are ſo few happy marriages. 

But there are few firſt-impreſſionsfitto be encouraged. 

I am afraid ſo too, Madam. I have a very indifferent opinion of light and firſt impreſſions. But, as I have often ſaid, all I wiſh for is, to have leave to liveſingle. 

Indeed you muſt not, Miſs. Your father and mother will be unhappy till they ſee you marry'd, and out of Lovelace's reach.—I am told, that you propoſe to condition with him (ſo far are matters gone between you), never to haveanyman, if you have nothim. 

I know no better way to prevent miſchief on all ſides, I freely own it—And there is not, ifhebe out of the queſtion, another man in the world, I can think favourably of.—Nevertheleſs, I would give all I have in the world, that he were marry'd to ſome other perſon—Indeed I would, Bella, for all you put on that ſmile of incredulity. 

May be ſo, Clary: But I will ſmile for all that. 

Ifhebe out of the queſtion! repeated my aunt—So, Miſs Clary, I ſee how it is.—I will go down.—(Miſs Harlowe, ſhall I follow you?)—And I will endeavour to perſuade your papa to let my ſiſter herſelf come up: And a happier event may then reſult.— 

Depend upon it, Madam, ſaid my ſiſter, This will be the caſe: My mamma and ſhe will be both in tears; but with this different effect; My mamma will come down ſoften'd, and cut to the heart; but will leave her favourite harden'd, from the advantages ſhe will think ſhe has over my mamma's tenderneſs.—Why, Madam, it was for this very reaſon the girl is not admitted into her preſence. 

Thus ſhe run on, as ſhe went down-ſtairs. 

LETTER XLIV. MiſsCLARISSA HARLOWE,To MiſsHOWE.
MY heart fluttered with the hope and the fear of ſeeing my mamma, and with the ſhame and the grief of having given her ſo much uneaſineſs. But it needed not: She was not permitted to come. But my aunt was ſo good as to return; yet not without my ſiſter: And, taking my hand, made me ſit down by her. 

She came, ſhe muſt own,officiouſly,ſhe ſaid, thisoncemore; tho' againſt the opinion of my father: But knowing, and dreading, the conſequence of my oppoſition, ſhe could notbutcome. 

She then ſet forth to me, my friends expectations from me; Mr. Solmes's riches (three times as rich he came out to be as any-body had thought him); the ſettlements propoſed; Mr. Lovelace's bad character; their averſion to him; all in a very ſtrong light; but not a ſtronger, than my mamma had before placed them in. My mamma, ſurely, could not have given the particulars of what had paſſed between herſelf and me: If ſhe had, my aunt would not have repeated many of the ſame ſentiments, as you will find ſhe did, that had been ſtill more ſtrongly urged, without effect, by her venerable ſiſter. 

She ſaid, it would break the heart of my father to have it imagin'd, that he had not a power over his child; and that, ashethought, for my own good: A child too, whom they always had doated upon!—Deareſt, deareſt Miſs, concluded ſhe, claſping her fingers, with the moſt condeſcending earneſtneſs, let me beg of you formyſake, foryour ownſake, for ahundredſakes, to get over this averſeneſs, and give up your prejudices, and make every-one happy and eaſy once more.—I would kneel to you, my deareſt niece—Nay, Iwillkneel to you!— 

And down ſhe dropp'd, and I with her, kneeling to her, and beſeeching her not to kneel; claſping my arms about her, and bathing her worthy boſom with my tears! 

Oh riſe! riſe! my beloved aunt, ſaid I: You cut me to the heart with this condeſcending goodneſs. 

Say then, my deareſt niece, ſay then, that you will oblige all your friends! If you love us, Ibeſeechyou do! 

How can I promiſe what I can ſooner chooſe to die than to perform!— 

Say then, my dear, you'llconſiderof it. Say you will butreaſonwith yourſelf. Give us but hopes. Don't let me intreat, andthusintreat, in vain. For ſtill ſhe kneeled, and I by her. 

What a hard caſe is mine!—Could I butdoubt,I know I couldconquer.—That which is an inducement to my friends, is none at all to me!—How often, my deareſt aunt, muſt I repeat the ſame thing!—Let me but be ſingle—Cannot I live ſingle? Let me be ſent, as I have propoſed, to Scotland, to Florence; any-whither: Let me be ſent a ſlave to the Indies; any-whither: Any of theſe I will conſent to. But I cannot,cannotthink of giving my vows to a man I cannot endure!— 

Well then riſing; (Bella ſilently, with uplifted hands, reproaching my ſuppoſed perverſeneſs) I ſee nothing can prevail with you to oblige us. 

WhatcanI do, my deareſt aunt Hervey? WhatcanI do? Were I capable of giving a hope I meant not to inlarge, then could I ſay, I wouldconſiderof your kind advice. But I would rather be thoughtperverſethaninſincere.Is there, however, nomedium?Cannothingbe thought of? Willnothingdo, but to have a man who is themorediſguſtful to me, becauſe he is unjuſt in the very articles he offers? 

Who now, Clary, ſaid my ſiſter, do you reflect upon? Conſider That. 

Make not invidious applications of what I ſay, Bella. It may not be look'd upon in the ſame light by every one. Thegiverand theaccepterare principally anſwerable, in an unjuſt donation. While I think of it in this light, I ſhould be inexcuſable to be the latter. But why do I enter upon aſuppoſitionof this nature? My heart, as I have often,oftenſaid, recoils at thethoughtsof the man, in every light.—Whoſe father, but mine, agrees upon articles, where there is no proſpect of a liking? Where the direct contrary is avow'd, all along avow'd, withoutthe leaſt variation, orſhadowof a change of ſentiment?—But it is not my father's doing originally. O my cruel, cruel brother, to cauſe a meaſure to be forced upon me, which he would not behave tolerably under, were the like to be offer'd to him! 

The girl is got into her altitudes, aunt Hervey, ſaid my ſiſter. You ſee, Madam, ſhe ſpares no-body. Be pleaſed to let her know what ſhe has to truſt to. Nothing is to be done with her. Pray, Madam, pronounce her doom. 

My aunt retir'd to the window, weeping, with my ſiſter in her hand: I cannot, indeed I cannot, Miſs Harlowe, ſaid ſhe, ſoftly (but yet I heard every word ſhe ſaid): There is great hardſhip in her caſe. She is a noble child, after all. What pity things are gone ſo far! But Mr. Solmes ought to be told to deſiſt. 

O Madam, ſaid my ſiſter, in a kind of loud whiſper, areyoucaught too by the little Syren?—My mamma did well not to come up!—I queſtion whether my papa himſelf, after his firſt indignation, would not be turn'd round by her. Nobody but my brother can do any-thing with her, I am ſure. 

Don't think of your brother's coming up, ſaid my aunt, ſtill in a low voice—He is too furious by much. I ſee no obſtinacy, no perverſeneſs in her manner! If your brother comes, I will not be anſwerable for the conſequences: For I thought twice or thrice ſhe would have gone into fits. 

O Madam, ſhe has a ſtrong heart!—And you ſee there is no prevailing upon her, tho' you were upon your knees to her. 

My ſiſter left my aunt muſing at the window, with her back towards us; and took that opportunity to inſult me ſtill more barbarouſly: For, ſtepping to my cloſet, ſhe took up the patterns which my mamma had ſent me up, and bringing them to me, ſhe ſpread them upon the chair by me; and, offering one, and then another, upon her ſleeve andſhoulder, Thus ſhe ran on, with great ſeeming tranquillity, but whiſperingly, that my aunt might not hear her.This,Clary, is a pretty pattern enough: ButThisis quitecharming!I would adviſe you to make your appearance in it. AndThis,were I you, ſhould be my wedding night-gown—andThismy ſecond dreſs'd ſuit! Won't you give orders, love, to have your grandmother's jewels new ſet?—Or will you think to ſhew away in the new ones that Mr. Solmes intends to preſent to you? He talks of laying out two or three thouſand pounds in preſents, child! Dear heart!—How gorgeouſly will you be array'd!—What! ſilent, my dear, mamma Norton'sſweet dear!What! ſilent ſtill?—But, Clary, won't you have a Velvet ſuit? It would cut a great figure in a country church, you know: And the weather may bear it for a month yet to come. Crimſon Velvet, ſuppoſe! Such a fine complection as yours, how would it be ſet off by it! What an agreeable bluſh would it give you!—High-ho! (mocking me; for I ſighed to be thus fooled with): And do you ſigh, love?—Well then, as it will be a ſolemn wedding, what think you ofblackVelvet, child?—Silent ſtill, Clary!—Black Velvet, ſo fair as you are, with thoſe charming eyes, gleaming thro' a wintry cloud, like an April Sun!—Does not Lovelace tell you they are charming eyes!—How lovely will you appear to every one!—What! ſilent ſtill, love!—But about your laces, Clary!— 

She would have gone on ſtill further, had not my aunt advanced towards us, wiping her eyes—What! whiſpering, Ladies! You ſeem ſo eaſy and ſo pleas'd, Miſs Harlowe, with your private conference, that I hope I ſhall carry down good news. 

I am only giving her my opinion of her patterns,here.—Unaſk'd indeed.—But ſhe ſeems, by her ſilence, to approve of my judgment. 

O Bella! ſaid I, that Mr. Lovelace had not taken you at your word!—You had before now been exerciſingyour judgment on your own account: AndIhad been happy, as well asyou!—Was it my fault, I pray you, that it was not ſo?—O how ſhe rav'd! 

To be ſo ready togive,Bella, and ſo loth totake,is not very fair in you. 

The poor Bella deſcended to call names. 

Why, ſiſter, ſaid I, you are as angry, as if there were more in the hint, than poſſibly might be deſigned. My wiſh is ſincere, for both our ſakes!—for the whole family's ſake!—And what (good now) is there in it?—Do not, do not, dear Bella, give me cauſe to ſuſpect, that I have found a reaſon for your unſiſterly behaviour to me; and which till now was wholly unaccountable from ſiſter to ſiſter— 

Fie, fie, Miſs Clary! ſaid my aunt. 

My ſiſter was more and more outrageous. 

O how much fitter, ſaid I, to be ajeſt,than ajeſter!—But now, Bella, turn the glaſs to you, and ſee how poorly ſits the robe upon your own ſhoulders, which you have been ſo unmercifully fixing upon mine! 

Fie, fie, Miſs Clary! repeated my aunt. 

And fie, fie, likewiſe, good Madam, to Miſs Harlowe, you would ſay, were you to have heard her barbarous inſults upon me! 

Let us go, Madam, ſaid my ſiſter, with great violence; let us leave the creature to ſwell till ſhe burſts with her own poiſon.—The laſt time I will ever come near her, in the mind I am in! 

It is ſo eaſy a thing, return'd I, were I to be mean enough to follow an example that is ſo cenſureable in the ſetter of it, to vanquiſh ſuch a teazing ſpirit as yours, with its own blunt weapons, that I am amaz'd you will provoke me!—Yet, Bella, ſince youwillgo (for ſhe had hurry'd to the door), forgive me: I do you. And you have a double reaſon to do ſo, both from elderſhip, and the offence ſo ſtudiouſly given to one in affliction.—But mayyoube happy, tho'Inever ſhall!—Mayyounever have halfthe trialsIhave had! Be this your comfort, that you cannot have a ſiſter to treatyou,as you have treatedme!And ſo God bleſs you! 

O thou art a—And down ſhe flung without ſaying what. 

Permit me, Madam, ſaid I to my aunt, ſinking down, and claſping her knees with my arms, to detain you one moment—Not to ſay any thing about my poor ſiſter—She is her own puniſher—Only to thank you for all your condeſcending goodneſs to me. I only beg of you, not to impute to obſtinacy the immoveableneſs I have ſhewn to ſo tender a friend; and to forgive me every thing I have ſaid or done amiſs in your preſence: For it has not proceeded from inward rancour to the poor Bella. But I will be bold to ſay, that neither She, nor my Brother, nor even my Father himſelf, knows what a heart they have ſet a bleeding. 

I ſaw, to my comfort, what effect my ſiſter's abſence wrought for me.—Riſe, my noble-minded niece!—charming creature!—[Thoſe were her kind words] kneel not to me!—Keep to yourſelf what I now ſay to you: I admire you more than I can expreſs—And if you can forbear claiming your eſtate, and can reſolve to avoid Lovelace, you will continue to be the greateſt miracle I ever knew at your years.—But I muſt haſten down after your ſiſter.—Theſe are my laſt words to you: Conform to your father's will, if you poſſibly can. How meritorious will it be in you to do ſo! Pray to God toenableyou to conform. You don't know what may be done. 

Only, my dear aunt, one word,oneword more (for ſhe was going)—Speak up all you can for my dear Mrs. Norton. She is but low in the world: Should ill health overtake her, ſhe may not know how to live without my mamma's favour. I ſhall have no means to help her; for I will want neceſſaries before I will aſſert my right: And I do aſſure you,ſhe has ſaid ſo many things to me in behalf of my reſigning to my father's will, that her arguments have not a little contributed to make me reſolve to avoid the extremities, which nevertheleſs I pray to God they do not at laſt force me upon. And yet they deprive me of her advice, and think unjuſtly of one of the moſt excellent of women. 

I am glad to hear you ſay This: And takeThis,andThis,andThis,my charming niece (for ſo ſhe call'd me at every word almoſt); kiſſing me earneſtly, and claſping her arms about my neck: And God protect you, and direct you! But youmuſtſubmit: Indeed youmuſt.Someone dayin a month fromThis,is all the choice that is left you. 

And this, I ſuppoſe, was the doom my ſiſter call'd for; yet not worſe than what had been pronounced upon me before. 

She repeated theſe laſt ſentences louder than the former. And remember, Miſs, added ſhe, it is yourdutyto comply—And down ſhe went, leaving me with my heart full, and my eyes runing over. 

The very repetition of this, fills me with almoſt equal concern, to that which I felt at the time. I can write no more; miſtineſſes of all the colours in the rainbow twinkling upon my deluged eye. 

Wedneſday, Five o'Clock.I WILL add a few lines—My aunt, as ſhe went down from me, was met at the foot of the ſtairs by my ſiſter, who ſeemed to think ſhe had ſtay'd a good while after her: And hearing her laſt words preſcribing to me implicit duty, praiſed her for it, and exclaim'd againſt my obſtinacy, with, Did you ever hear of ſuch perverſeneſs, Madam? Could you have thought, that your Clariſſa, and every body's Clariſſa, was ſuch a girl?—And who, asyouſaid, is to ſubmit, her father or ſhe? 

My aunt ſaid ſomething in anſwer to her, compaſſionatingme, as I thought, by her accent: But I heard not the words. 

Such a ſtrange perſeverance in a meaſure ſo unreaſonable!—But my brother and ſiſter are continually miſrepreſenting all I ſay and do; and I am deprived of the opportunity of defending myſelf!—My ſiſter ſaysSee p.287., that had they thought me ſuch a championeſs, they would not have engaged with me: And now, not knowing how to reconcile my ſuppoſed obſtinacy with my general character, and natural temper, they ſeem to hope to tire me out, and reſolve to vary their meaſures accordingly. My brother, you ſee,In his Lett. p.297., is determin'd to carry this point, or to abandon Harlowe-place, and never to ſee it more:—So they are to loſe a ſon, or to conquer a daughter—the perverſeſt and moſt ingrateful that ever parents had!—This is the light he places things in: And has undertaken, it ſeems, to ſubdue me, ifhisadvice be followed. It will befurthertry'd,thatI am convinced of; and what will be their next meaſure, who can divine? 

I ſhall diſpatch, with this, my anſwer to yours of Sunday laſt; begun on MondaySee Lett.xl.; but which is not yet quite finiſh'd. It is too long to copy: I have not time for it. In it I have been very free with you, my dear, in more places than one. I cannot ſay, that I am pleas'd with all I have written:—Yet will not now alter it.—My mind is not at eaſe enough for the ſubject.—Don't be angry with me. Yet, if you can excuſe one or two paſſages, it will be, becauſe they were written by 

Your CLARISSA HARLOWE.END ofVOL. I.