Clarissa: Or, the history of a young lady: comprehending the most important concerns of private life. ... Published by the editor of Pamela. ... [pt.4]Richardson, Samuel, 1689-1761.369 600dpi bitonal TIFF page images and SGML/XML encoded textUniversity of Michigan LibraryAnn Arbor, Michigan2008 September004835420T58992CW112657733K051638.004CW3312658739ECLL0447200104This keyboarded and encoded edition of the work described above is co-owned by the institutions providing financial support to the Early English Books Online Text Creation Partnership. This Phase I text is available for reuse, according to the terms ofCreative Commons 0 1.0 Universal. The text can be copied, modified, distributed and performed, even for commercial purposes, all without asking permission. 

Clarissa: Or, the history of a young lady: comprehending the most important concerns of private life. ... Published by the editor of Pamela. ...Richardson, Samuel, 1689-1761.7v.,plate : engr.music ; 12⁰.printed for S. Richardson: and sold by A. Millar: J. and Ja. Rivington: John Osborn; and by J. Leake, at Bath,London :1748.The editor of Pamela = Samuel Richardson.Vols. 3-7 bear the imprint: "London: printed for S. Richardson: and sold by John Osborn; Andrew Millar; J. and J. Rivington; and by J. Leake, at Bath", except vol. 4 has "J. and Ja. Rivington" in place of "J. and J. Rivington".Vols. 3 and 4 are found in two states: in the first state, three leaves of preface intended for vol. 3 are found between the titlepage and text of vol. 4. In the second state, the preface has been removed from vol.4 to be found between titlepage and text of vol. 3 (Sale).Vols. 5-7 were also issued as part of the 2nd. edition, 1749.Augustan Reprint Society: preface (by William Warburton) to vol. III and vol. IV only.Reproduction of original from the British Library.Sale, 32English Short Title Catalog, ESTCT58992.Electronic data. Farmington Hills, Mich. : Thomson Gale, 2003. Page image (PNG). Digitized image of the microfilm version produced in Woodbridge, CT by Research Publications, 1982-2002 (later known as Primary Source Microfilm, an imprint of the Gale Group).Created by converting TCP files to TEI P5 using tcp2tei.xsl, TEI @ Oxford. 

EEBO-TCP is a partnership between the Universities of Michigan and Oxford and the publisher ProQuest to create accurately transcribed and encoded texts based on the image sets published by ProQuest via their Early English Books Online (EEBO) database (http://eebo.chadwyck.com). The general aim of EEBO-TCP is to encode one copy (usually the first edition) of every monographic English-language title published between 1473 and 1700 available in EEBO. 

EEBO-TCP aimed to produce large quantities of textual data within the usual project restraints of time and funding, and therefore chose to create diplomatic transcriptions (as opposed to critical editions) with light-touch, mainly structural encoding based on the Text Encoding Initiative (http://www.tei-c.org). 

The EEBO-TCP project was divided into two phases. The 25,363 texts created during Phase 1 of the project have been released into the public domain as of 1 January 2015. Anyone can now take and use these texts for their own purposes, but we respectfully request that due credit and attribution is given to their original source. 

Users should be aware of the process of creating the TCP texts, and therefore of any assumptions that can be made about the data. 

Text selection was based on the New Cambridge Bibliography of English Literature (NCBEL). If an author (or for an anonymous work, the title) appears in NCBEL, then their works are eligible for inclusion. Selection was intended to range over a wide variety of subject areas, to reflect the true nature of the print record of the period. In general, first editions of a works in English were prioritized, although there are a number of works in other languages, notably Latin and Welsh, included and sometimes a second or later edition of a work was chosen if there was a compelling reason to do so. 

Image sets were sent to external keying companies for transcription and basic encoding. Quality assurance was then carried out by editorial teams in Oxford and Michigan. 5% (or 5 pages, whichever is the greater) of each text was proofread for accuracy and those which did not meet QA standards were returned to the keyers to be redone. After proofreading, the encoding was enhanced and/or corrected and characters marked as illegible were corrected where possible up to a limit of 100 instances per text. Any remaining illegibles were encoded as <gap>s. Understanding these processes should make clear that, while the overall quality of TCP data is very good, some errors will remain and some readable characters will be marked as illegible. Users should bear in mind that in all likelihood such instances will never have been looked at by a TCP editor. 

The texts were encoded and linked to page images in accordance with level 4 of the TEI in Libraries guidelines. 

Copies of the texts have been issued variously as SGML (TCP schema; ASCII text with mnemonic sdata character entities); displayable XML (TCP schema; characters represented either as UTF-8 Unicode or text strings within braces); or lossless XML (TEI P5, characters represented either as UTF-8 Unicode or TEI g elements). 

Keying and markup guidelines are available at theText Creation Partnership web site. 

engTHE HISTORY OF Miſs CLARISSA HARLOWE.
LETTER I. MiſsCLARISSA HARLOWE,To MiſsHOWE.
Sunday Night, May7.WHEN you reflect upon my unhappy ſituation, which is attended with ſo many indelicate and even ſhocking circumſtances, ſome of which my pride will not let me think of with patience; all aggravated by the contents of my couſin's affecting letter; you will not wonder, that the vapouriſhneſs which has laid hold of my heart, ſhould riſe to my pen. And yet it would be more kind, more friendly in me, to conceal fromyou,who take ſuch a generous intereſt in my concerns, that worſt part of my griefs, which communication and complaint cannot relieve. 

But to whom can I unboſom myſelf but to you?—When the man who ought to be my protector, as hehas brought upon me all my diſtreſſes, adds to my apprehenſions; when I have not even a ſervant on whoſe fidelity I can rely, or to whom I can break my griefs as they ariſe; and when his bountiful temper and gay heart, attach every one to him; and I am but a cypher, to give him ſignificance, and myſelf pain?—Theſe griefs, therefore, do what I can, will ſometimes burſt into tears; and theſe mingling with my ink, will blot my paper.—And I know you will not grudge me the temporary relief. 

But I ſhall go on in the ſtrain I left off with in my laſt; when I intended rather to apologize for my melancholy. But let what I have above written, once for all, be my apology. My misfortunes have given you a call to diſcharge the nobleſt offices of the friendſhip we have vowed to each other, in advice and conſolation, and it would be an injury to it, and to you, to ſuppoſe it needed even that call. 

She then tells Miſs Howe, that now her cloaths are come, Mr. Lovelace is continually teazing her to go abroad with him in a coach, attended by whom ſhe pleaſes of her own ſex; either for the air, or to the public diverſions. 

She gives the particulars of a converſation that has paſſed between them on that ſubject, and his ſeveral propoſals. But takes notice, that he ſays not the leaſt word of the ſolemnity which he ſo much preſſed upon her before they came to town; and which, as ſhe obſerves, was neceſſary to give propriety to his propoſals. 

Now, my dear,ſays ſhe,I cannot bear the life I live. I would be glad at my heart to be out of his reach. If I were, he ſhould ſoon ſee the difference. If I muſt be humbled, it had better be by thoſe to whom I owe duty, than by him. My aunt writes in•er letterSee Vol.III.p.251., that SHE dare not propoſe any thing inmy favour. You tell me, that, upon inquiry, you findSee Vol.III.p.272, 273., that, had I not been unhappily ſeduced away, a change of meaſures was actually reſolved upon; and that my mamma, particularly, was determined to exert herſelf, for the reſtoration of the family peace; and, in order to ſucceed the better, had thoughts of trying to engage my uncle Harlowe in her party. 

Let me build on theſe foundations.—I can but try, my dear.—It is my duty to try allprobablemethods to reſtore the poor outcaſt to favour.—And who knows but that once indulgent uncle, who has very great weight in the family, may be induced to interpoſe in my behalf?—I will give up all right and title to my grandfather's bequeſts, with all my heart and ſoul, to whom they ſhall think fit, in order to make my propoſal palatable to my brother. And that my ſurrender may be effectual, I will engage never to marry. 

What think you, my dear, of this expedient? Surely they cannot reſolve to renounce me for ever. If they look with impartial eyes upon what has happened, theywillhave ſomething to blamethemſelvesfor, as well asme. 

I preſume, that you will be of opinion, that this expedient is worth trying. But here is my difficulty; If I ſhould write, my hard-hearted brother has ſo ſtrongly confederated every-body againſt me, that my letter would be handed about from one to another, till he had hardened every one to refuſe my requeſt; whereas, could my uncle be engaged to eſpouſe my cauſe, as fromhimſelf,I ſhould have ſome hope; as I preſume to think he would ſoon have my mother, and my aunt, of his party. 

What therefore I am thinking of, is this.—Suppoſe Mr. Hickman, whoſe good character has gained him every-body's reſpect, ſhould put himſelf in my uncle Harlowe's way? And as if, from your knowlege ofthe ſtate of things between Mr. Lovelace and me, aſſure him not only of the above particulars, but that I am under no obligations, that ſhall hinder me from taking his directions? 

I ſubmit the whole to your diſcretion, whether to purſue it at all, or in what manner. But if it be purſued, and if my uncle refuſes to intereſt himſelf in my favour, upon Mr. Hickman's application, as from you (for ſo, for obvious reaſons, it muſt be put), I can then have no hope; and my next ſtep, in the mind I am in, ſhall be, to throw myſelf into the protection of the ladies of his family. 

It were an impiety to adopt the following lines, becauſe it would be throwing upon the decrees of Providence a fault too much my own. But often do I revolve them, for the ſake of the general ſimilitude which they bear to my unhappy, yet undeſigned error. 

To you, great gods! I make my laſt appeal:Or clear my virtues, or my crimes reveal.If wand'ring in the maze of life I run,And backward tread the ſteps I ſought to ſhun,Impute my errors to your own decree;MyFEETare guilty; but myHEARTis free.Miſs Harlowe dates again on Monday, to let Miſs Howe know, that Mr. Lovelace, on obſerving her uneaſineſs, had introduced to her Mr. Mennell, Mrs. Fretchville's kinſman, who managed all her affairs [a young officer of ſenſe and politeneſs, ſhe calls him]; and who gave her an account of the houſe and furniture, to the ſame effect that Mr. Lovelace had done before; as alſo of the melancholy way Mrs. Fretchville is in. 

She tells Miſs Howe, how extremely urgent Mr. Lovelace was with the gentleman, to get his ſpouſe (as he now always calls her before company) a ſight of the houſe: And that Mr. Mennell undertook that veryafternoon to ſhew her all of it, except the apartment Mrs. Fretchville ſhould be in, when ſhe went. But that ſhe choſe not to take another ſtep till ſhe knew how ſhe approved of her ſcheme to have her uncle ſounded; and what ſucceſs, if try'd, it would be attended with. 

Mr. Lovelace, in his humourous way, gives his friend an account of the Lady's peeviſhneſs and dejection, on receiving a letter with her cloaths. He regrets that he has loſt her confidence; which he attributes to bringing her into the company of his four companions. Yet he thinks he muſt excuſe them, and cenſure her for over-niceneſs; for that he never ſaw men behave better, at leaſt notthem. 

Mentioning his introducing Mr. Mennell to her,'Now, Jack, ſays he, was it not very kind of Mr. Mennell,CaptainMennell, I ſometimes called him (for among the military men there is no ſuch officer, thou knoweſt, as aLieutenantor anEnſign): Was it not very kind in him, to come along with me ſo readily as he did, to ſatisfy my beloved about the vapouriſh lady and the houſe?' 

'But who is Captain Mennell, methinks thou aſkeſt? I never heard of ſuch a man as Captain Mennell. 

'Very likely. But knoweſt thou not young Newcomb, 'honeſt Doleman's nephew? 

'O-ho! Is it he? 

'It is. And I have chang'd his name by virtue of my own ſingle authority. Knoweſt thou not, that I am a great name-father? Preferments I beſtow, both military and civil. I give eſtates, and take them away at my pleaſure. Quality too I create. And by a ſtill more valuable prerogative, Idegradeby virtue of my own imperial will, without any other act of forfeiture than my own convenience. What a poor thing is a monarch to me! 

'But Mennell, now he has ſeen this angel of a woman, has qualms; that's the devil!—I ſhall have enough to do to keep him right. But it is the leſs wonder, that he ſhould ſtagger, when a few hours converſation with the ſame lady could make four much more harden'd varlets findhearts—Only, that I am confident, that I ſhall at laſt reward her virtue, if her virtue overcome me, or I ſhould find it impoſſible to perſevere.—For at times, I have confounded qualms myſelf. But ſay not a word of them to the Confraternity: Nor laugh at me for them thyſelf.' 

In another letter, dated Monday night, he tells his friend, That the lady keeps him at ſuch diſtance, that he is ſure ſomething is going on between her and Miſs Howe, notwithſtanding the prohibition from Mrs. Howe to both; and as he has thought it ſome degree of merit in himſelf to puniſh others for their tranſgreſſions, he thinks both theſe girls puniſhable for the breach of parental injunctions. And as to their letter-carrier, he has been inquiring into his way of living; and finding him to be a common poacher, a deer-ſtealer, and warren-robber, who, under pretence of higgling, deals with a ſet of cuſtomers, who conſtantly take all he brings, whether fiſh, fowl, or veniſon, he holds himſelf juſtify'd (ſince Wilſon's conveyance muſt at preſent be ſacred) to have him ſtript and robbed, and what money he has about him given to the poor; ſince, if he take not money as well as letters, he ſhall be ſuſpected. 

'To ſerve one's ſelf, ſays he, and puniſh a villain at the ſame time, is ſerving public and private. The law was not made for ſuch a man as me. And Imuſtcome at correſpondencies ſo diſobediently carried on. 

'But, on ſecond thoughts, if I could find out, that the dear creature carried any of her letters inher pockets, I can get her to a play or to a concert, and ſhe may have the misfortune to loſe her pockets.' 

'But how ſhall I find this out; ſince her Dorcas knows no more of her dreſſing or undreſſing than her Lovelace? For ſhe is dreſſed for the day, before ſhe appears even to her ſervant.—Vilely ſuſpicious!—Upon my ſoul, Jack, a ſuſpicious temper is a puniſhable temper. If a lady ſuſpects a rogue in an honeſt man, is it not enough to make the honeſt man who knows it, a rogue?' 

'But as to her pockets, I think my mind hankers after them, as the leſs miſchievous attempt.—But they cannot hold all the letters that I ſhould wiſh to ſee. And yet a woman's pockets are half as deep as ſhe is high. Ty'd round them as ballaſt-bags, I preſume, leſt the wind, as they move with full ſail, from whale-ribb'd canvas, ſhould blow away the gypſies.' 

He then, in apprehenſion, that ſomething is meditating between the two ladies, or that ſomething may be ſet on foot to get Miſs Harlowe out of his hands, relates ſeveral of his contrivances, and boaſts of his inſtructions given in writing to Dorcas and to his ſervant Wil•▪Summers; and ſays, that he has provided againſt every poſſible accident, even to bring her back, if ſhe ſhould eſcape, or in caſe ſhe ſhould go abroad, and then refuſe to return; and hopes ſo to manage, as that, ſhould he make an attempt, whether he ſucceed in it, or not, he may have a pretence to detain her. 

He orders Dorcas to cultivate by all means her lady's favour; to lament her incapacity as to writeing and reading; to ſhew her lady letters from pretended country relations, and beg her advice how to anſwer them, and to get them anſwer'd; to be always aiming at ſcrawling with a pen, leſt inky fingers ſhould give ſuſpicions. And ſays, that he has givenher an ivory-leaved pocket-book, with a ſilver pencil, that ſhe may make memoranda on occaſion. 

The lady has already, he ſays, at Mrs. Sinclair's motion, removed her cloaths out of the trunks they came in, into an ample mahogany repoſitory, where they will lie at full-length, and which has drawers in it for linen.—'A repoſitory, ſays he, that uſed to hold the richeſt ſuits which ſome of the nymphs put on, when they are to be dreſſed out, to captivate or to ape quality. For many a counteſs, thou knoweſt, has our mother equipp'd; nay, two or three ducheſſes, who live uponquality-termswith their lords. But this to ſuch as will come up to her price, and can make an appearance like quality themſelves on the occaſion: For the reputation of perſons of birth muſt not lie at the mercy of every under-degreed ſinner.' 

'A maſter-key which will open every lock in this cheſt, is put into Dorcas's hands; and ſhe is to take care, when ſhe ſearches for papers, before ſhe removes any thing, to obſerve how it lies, that ſhe may replace all to a hair. Sally and Polly can occaſionally help to tranſcribe. Slow and ſure with ſuch a lady muſt be all my movements.' 

'It is impoſſible that one ſo young and ſo inexperienced can have all her caution from herſelf; the behaviour of the women ſo unexceptionable; no revellings, no company ever admitted into this inner-houſe; all genteel, quiet, and eaſy, in it; the nymphs well-bred, and well-read; her firſt diſguſts to the old one got over.—It muſt be Miſs Howe therefore, who once was in danger of being taken in by one of our claſs, by honeſt Sir George Colmar, as thou haſt heard, that makes my progreſs difficult.' 

Thou ſeeſt, Belford, by the aboveprecautionaries,that I forget nothing. As he ſong ſays, it is not to be imagin'dOn what ſlight ſtringsDepend thoſe things,On which men build their glory! 

'So far, ſo good. I ſhall never let my goddeſs reſt till I have firſt diſcover'd where ſhe puts her letters, and next till I have got her to a play, to a concert, or to take an airing with me of a day, or ſo.' 

'I GAVE thee juſt now ſome ofmycontrivances. Dorcas, who is ever attentive to all her lady's motions, has given me ſome inſtances of hermiſtreſs's precautions. She wafers her letters, it ſeems, in two places; pricks the wafers; and then ſeals upon them. No doubt but thoſe brought hither are taken the ſame care of. And ſhe always examines the ſeals of the latter before ſhe opens them. I muſt, I muſt, come at them. This difficulty augments my curioſity. Strange, ſo much as ſhe writes, and at all hours, that not one ſleepy or forgetful moment has offer'd in our favour!' 

'A fair contention, thou ſeeſt. Do not thou therefore reproach me for endeavouring to take advantage of hertender years. Credulityſhe has none. Am not I ayoung fellow,myſelf? As to herfortune,that's out of the queſtion; fortune never had any other attractions for me, than to ſtimulate me on; and this, as I have elſewhere ſaid, for motives not ignoble. As tobeauty; pr'ythee, Jack, do thou, to ſpare my modeſty, make a compariſon between my Clariſſa for awoman,and thy Lovelace for aman!—The only point that can admit of debate, as I conceive, is, who has moſtwit,moſtcircumſpection:And that is what remains to be try'd.' 

'A ſad life, however, for the poor lady to live, as well as for me; that is to ſay, if ſhe be notnaturallyjealous. If ſhe be, her uneaſineſs is conſtitutional,and ſhe cannot help it; nor will it, in that caſe, hurt her. For a ſuſpicious temper willmakeoccaſions for doubt, if none were to offer to her hand; and ſo my fair one is obliged to me for ſaving her the trouble of ſtudying for theſe occaſions.—But after all, the plain way in every affair of the human life is the beſt, I believe. But it is not given me to chooſe it. Nor am I ſingular in the purſuit of the more intricate paths; ſince there are thouſands and ten thouſands, beſides me, who had rather fiſh in troubled waters than in ſmooth.' 

LETTER II. Mr.LOVELACE,ToJOHN BELEORD,Eſq.
Tueſday, May9.I Am a very unhappy fellow. This lady is ſaid to to be one of the ſweeteſt temper'd creatures in the world: And ſo I thought her. But to me, ſhe is one of the moſt perverſe. I never was ſuppoſed to be an ill-natur'd puppy neither. How can it be? I imagin'd for a long while, that we were born to make each other happy: But, quite the contrary; we really ſeem to be ſent to plague one another. 

I will write a Comedy, I think. I have a title ready; and that's half the work.The Quarrelſome Lovers.'Twill do. There's ſomething new and ſtriking in it. Yet, more or leſs, all lovers quarrel. Old Terence has taken notice of that; and obſerves upon it, That lovers falling-out occaſions lovers falling-in; and a better underſtanding of courſe. 'Tis natural that it ſhould be ſo. But with us, we fall-out ſo often, without falling-in once; and a ſecond quarrel ſo generally happens before a firſt is made up; that it is hard to gueſs what event our loves will be attended with. But Shakeſpeare ſays;—Come what come may,Patience and time run thro' the rougheſt day.And that ſhall be my comfort. No man living bears croſſes better than myſelf: But then they muſt be ofmy ownmaking: And even This is a great merit, and a great excellence, think what thou wilt: Since moſt of the troubles, which fall to the lot of mortals, are brought upon themſelves, either by theirtoo largedeſires, ortoo littledeſerts. But I ſhall make myſelf a common man by-and-by: Which is what no one yet ever thought me. I will now lead to the occaſion of this preamble. 

I had been out. On my return, meeting Dorcas on the ſtairs—Your lady in her chamber, Dorcas? In the dining-room, Sir: And if ever you hope for an opportunity to come at a letter, it muſt be now. For at her feet I ſaw one lie, which, by its open'd folds, ſhe has been reading, with a little parcel of others ſhe is now buſied with. All pulled out of her pocket, as I believe: So, Sir, you'll know where to find them another time. 

I was ready to leap for joy, and inſtantly reſolved to bring forward an expedient which I had held in petto; and entering into the dining-room, with an air of tranſport, I boldly claſped my arms about her, as ſhe ſat (ſhe huddling up her papers in her handkerchief all the time, the dropt paper unſeen): O my deareſt life, a lucky expedient have Mr. Mennell and I hit upon, juſt now. In order to haſten Mrs. Fretchville to quit the houſe, I have agreed, if you approve of it, to entertain her cook, her houſemaid, and two men-ſervants (about whom ſhe was very ſolicitous), till you are provided to your mind. And that no accommodations may be wanted, I have conſented to take the houſhold linen at an appraiſement. 

I am to pay down 500 l. and the remainder as ſoon as the bills can be look'd up, and the amount of themadjuſted. Thus will you have a charming houſe intirely ready to receive you, and any of my friends. They will ſoon be with you: They will not permit you long to ſuſpend my happy day.—And that nothing may be wanting to gratify your utmoſt punctilio, I will till then conſent to ſtay here at Mrs. Sinclair's, while you reſide at your new houſe; and leave the reſt to your own generoſity. 

O my beloved creature, will not this be agreeable to you? I am ſure it will—It muſt—And claſping her cloſer to me, I gave her a more fervent kiſs than ever I had dared to give her before: But ſtill let not my ardor overcome my diſcretion; for I took care to ſet my foot upon the letter, and ſcraped it farther from her, as it were behind her chair. 

She was in a paſſion at the liberty I took. Bowing low, I begg'd her pardon; and, ſtooping ſtill lower, in the ſame motion, took it up, and whipt it in my boſom. 

Pox on me, for a puppy, a fool, a blockhead, a clumſy varlet, and a mere Jack Belford!—I thought myſelf a much cleverer fellow than I am!—Why could I not have been followed in by Dorcas; who might have taken it up, while I addreſſed her lady? 

For here, the letter being unfolded, I could not put it into my boſom, without alarming her ears, as my ſudden motion did her eyes.—Up ſhe flew in a moment: Traitor! Judas! her eyes flaſhing lightning, and a perturbation in her eager countenance, ſo charming!—What have you taken up?—And then, what for both my ears I durſt not to have done to her, ſhe made no ſcruple to ſeize the ſtolen letter, tho' in my boſom. 

Beg-pardon apologies were all that now remained for me, on ſo palpable a detection. I claſped her hand, which had hold of the raviſh'd paper, between mine: O my beloved creature! can you think I have notſomecurioſity? Is it poſſible you can be thus forever employed; and I, loving narrative letter-writing above every other ſpecies of writing, and admiring your talent that way, ſhould not (thus upon the dawn of my happineſs, as I preſume to hope) burn with a deſire to be admitted into ſo ſweet a correſpondence. 

Let go my hand!—ſtamping with her pretty foot: How dare you, Sir!—At this rate, I ſee—Too plainly I ſee—And more ſhe could not ſay: But, gaſping, was ready to faint, with paſſion and affright; the devil a bit of her accuſtomed gentleneſs to be ſeen in her charming face, or to be heard in her muſical voice. 

Having gone thus far, loth, very loth was I to loſe my prize—Once more, I got hold of the rumpled-up letter!—Impudent man! were her words: Stamping again: For God's ſake, then it was!—I let go my prize, leſt ſhe ſhould faint away: But had the pleaſure firſt to find my hand within both hers, ſhe trying to open my reluctant fingers. How near was my heart, at that moment, to my hand, throbbing to my fingers ends, to be thus familiarly, altho' angrily, treated by the charmer of my ſoul! 

When ſhe had got it in her poſſeſſion, ſhe flew to the door: I threw myſelf in her way, ſhut it, and, in the humbleſt manner, beſought her to forgive me: And yet do you think the Harlowe-hearted charmer would; notwithſtanding the agreeable annunciation I came in with?—No, truly! but puſhing me rudely from the door, as if I had been nothing (yet do I love to try, ſo innocently to try, her ſtrength too!); ſhe gaining that force through paſſion, which I had loſt through fear; and out ſhe ſhot to her own apartment [Thank my ſtars ſhe could fly no further!]; and as ſoon as ſhe enter'd it, in a paſſion ſtill, ſhe double-locked and double-bolted herſelf in.—This my comfort, on reflection, that, upon a greater offence, it cannot be worſe! 

I retreated to my own apartment, with my heart full. And, my man Will. not being near me, gavemyſelf a plaguy knock on the forehead, with my double fiſt. 

And now is my charmer ſhut up from me: Refuſing to ſee me; refuſing her meals: Reſolvesnotto ſee me, that's more;—Never again, if ſhe can help it. 

In the mind ſhe is in—I hope ſhe has ſaid. The dear creatures, whenever they quarrel with their humble ſervants, ſhould always remember this ſaving clauſe,that they may not be forſworn. 

But thinkeſt thou that I will not make it the ſubject of one of my firſt plots, to inform myſelf of the reaſon why all this commotion was neceſſary on ſo ſlight an occaſion, as this would have been, were not the letters that paſs between theſe ladies of a treaſonable nature? 

Wedneſday Morning.No admiſſion to breakfaſt, any more than to ſupper. I wiſh this lady is not a ſimpleton, after all.—I have ſent up in Capt. Mennell's name. A meſſage from Capt. Mennell, Madam. 

It won't do!—She is of a baby age: She cannot be—a Solomon, I was going to ſay, in every thing. Solomon, Jack, was the wiſeſt man:—But didſt ever hear who was the wiſeſt woman?—I want a compariſon for this lady: Cunning women and witches, we read of without number. But I fancy wiſdom never entered into the character of a woman. It is not a requiſite of the Sex. Women, indeed, make better ſovereigns than men: But why is that?—Becauſe the women ſovereigns are governed by men; the men ſovereigns by women:—Charming by my ſoul! For hence we gueſs at the rudder by which both are governed. Yet, ſorry puppy as thou art, thou makeſt light of me for my attachment to this Sex; and even of my ardors to the moſt excellent one of it!— 

But to put wiſdom out of the queſtion, and to takecunningin: That is to ſay, To conſider womanasa woman; what ſhall we do, if this lady has ſomething extraordinary in her head?—Repeated charges has ſhe given for Wilſon, by a particular meſſenger, to ſend any letter directed for her, the moment it comes. 

I muſt keep a good look-out. She is not now afraid of her brother's plot. I ſhan't be at all ſurprized, if Singleton calls upon Miſs Howe, as the only perſon who knows, or is likely to know, where Miſs Harlowe is; pretending to have affairs of importance, and of particular ſervice to her, if he can but be admitted to her ſpeech. Of compromiſe, who knows, from her brother? 

Then will Miſs Howe warn her to keep cloſe; then will my protection be again neceſſary. This will do, I believe. Any thing from Miſs Howe muſt. 

Joſeph Leman is a vile fellow with her, and my implement. Joſeph, honeſt Joſeph, as I call him, may hang himſelf. I have play'd him off enough, and have very little further uſe for him. No need to wear one plot to the ſtumps, when I can find new ones every hour. 

Nor blame me for the uſe I make of my talents. Who, that had ſuch, would let 'em be idle? 

Well then, I will find a Singleton; that's all I have to do. 

Inſtantlyfind one!—Will.— 

Sir— 

This moment call me hither thy couſin Paul Wheatly, juſt come from ſea, whom thou wert recommending to my ſervice, if I were to marry and keep a pleaſure-boat. 

Preſto—Will.'s gone!—Paul will be here preſently!—Preſently will he be gone to Mrs. Howe's.—If Paul be Singleton's mate, coming from his captain, it will do as well as if it were Singleton himſelf. 

Sally, a little devil, often reproaches me with the ſlowneſs of my proceedings. But in a play, does not the principal entertainment lie in the firſt four acts? Is not all in a manner over, when you come to the fifth? And what a vultur of a man muſt he be, who ſowſes upon his prey, and in the ſame moment truſſes and devours? 

But to own the truth, I have overplotted myſelf. To make my work ſecure, as I thought, I have frighted the dear creature with my four Hottentots, and I ſhall be a long time, I doubt, before I can recover my loſt ground. And then theſe curſed folks at Harlowe-Place have made her out of humour with me, with herſelf, and with all the world, but Miſs Howe, who, no doubt, is continually adding difficulties to my other difficulties. And then I am very unwilling to have recourſe to meaſures which theſe daemons below are continually urging me to take. And the rather, as I am ſure, that, at laſt, ſhe muſt be legally mine. One complete trial over, and I think I will do her noble juſtice. 

WELL, Paul's gone!—Gone already!—Has all his leſſons!—A notable fellow!—Lord W.'s neceſſary-man was Paul before he went to ſea. A more ſenſible rogue Paul than Joſeph!—Not ſuch a pretender to piety neither, as the other. At what a price have I bought that Joſeph!—I had two to buy, in him—His conſcience, as well as the man.—I believe I muſt puniſh the raſcal at laſt: But muſt let him marry firſt: Then (tho' that may be puniſhment enough), as I bribed two at once in one man, I ſhall puniſh two at once in the man and his wife.—And how richly does Betty deſerve it for her behaviour to my goddeſs? 

But now I hear the ruſty hinges of my Beloved's door give me creaking invitation. My heart creaks and throbs with reſpondent trepidations: Whimſicalenough tho'! For what relation has a lover's heart to a ruſty pair of hinges?—But they are the hinges that open and ſhut the door of my Beloved's bed-chamber!—Relation enough in that! 

I hear not the door ſhut again. I ſhall have her commands I hope anon.—What ſignifies her keeping me thus at a diſtance?—She muſt be mine, let me do or offer what I will. Courage whenever I aſſume, all is over: For ſhould ſhe think of eſcaping from hence, whither can ſhe fly to avoid me? Her parents will not receive her: Her uncles will not entertain her: Her beloved Norton is in their direction, and cannot: Miſs Howe dare not: She has not one friend in town but me: Is intirely a ſtranger to the town. And what then is the matter with me, that I ſhould be thus unaccountably over-awed and tyrannized over, by a dear creature, who wants only to know how impoſſible it is that ſhe ſhould eſcape me, in order to be as humble to me, as ſhe is to her perſecuting relations? 

Should I even make the grand attempt, and fail, and ſhould ſhe hate me for it, her hatred can be but temporary. She has already incurred the cenſure of the world. She muſt therefore chooſe to be mine, for the ſake of ſoldering up her reputation in the eye of that impudent world. For, who that knows me, and knows that ſhe has been in my power, tho' but for twenty-four hours, will think her ſpotleſs as to fact, let her inclination be what it will?—And then human nature is ſuch a well-known rogue, that every man and woman judges by what each knows of themſelves, that inclination is no more to be truſted, where an opportunity is given, than I am; eſpecially where a woman young and blooming loves a man well enough to go off with him; for ſuch will be the world's conſtruction in the preſent caſe. 

She calls her maid Dorcas. No doubt, that I may hear her harmonious voice, and to give me an opportunityto pour out my ſoul at her feet; to renew all my vows; and to receive her pardon for the paſt offence: And then, with what pleaſure ſhall I begin upon a new ſcore; and afterwards wipe out that; and begin another, and another; till thelaſtoffence paſſes; and there can be no other. And once, after that, to be forgiven, will be to be forgiven for ever. 

THE door is again ſhut. Dorcas tells me, that ſhe denies to admit me to dine with her, as I had ordered her to requeſt for me next time ſhe ſaw her. Not uncivilly, however, denies. Coming to by degrees! Nothing but the laſt offence, the honeſt wench tells me, in the language of her principals below, will do with her. The laſt offence is meditating. Yet this vile recreant heart of mine plays me booty.—But here I conclude; tho' the tyranneſs leaves me nothing to do, but read, write, and fret. 

Subſcription is formal between us. Beſides, I am ſo totally hers, that I cannot ſay, how much I am thine, or any other perſon's. 

LETTER III. MiſsCLARISSA HARLOWE;To MiſsHOWE.
Tueſday, May9.IF, my dear, you approve of the application to my uncle Harlowe, I wiſh it may be made as ſoon as poſſible. We are quite out again. I have ſhut myſelf up from him. The offence indeed notverygreat—And yet it is too: He had like to have got a letter. One of yours. But never will I write again, or re-peruſe my papers, in an apartment where he thinks himſelf intitled to come. He did not read a line of it. Indeed he did not. So don't be uneaſy: And depend upon future caution. 

Thus it was. The ſun being upon my cloſet, and Mr. Lovelace abroad—She then gives Miſs Howe an account of his coming in by ſurprize upon her: of his fluttering ſpeech: of his bold addreſs: of her ſtruggle with him for the letter,&c. 

 

And now, my dear,proceeds ſhe,I am more and more convinced, that I am too much in his power to make it prudent to ſtay with him. And if my friendswillbut give me hope—Till I can know whether they will or not, I muſt do what I never ſtudied to do before in any caſe—that is, try to keep this difference open: And yet it will make me look little in my own eyes; becauſe I ſhall mean by it more than I can own. But this is one of the conſequences of a ſtep which will be ever deplored by 

YourCLARISSA HARLOWE.LETTER IV. MiſsHOWE,To MiſsCLARISSA HARLOWE.
Wedneſday, May10.I Much approve of your reſolution to leave this man, if you can have any encouragement from your uncle. And the rather, as I have heard but within theſe two hours ſome well-atteſted ſtories of him, that ſhew him to be one of the worſt of men as to our Sex. I do aſſure you, my dear friend, that had he a dozen lives, if all I have heard be true, he might have forfeited them all, and been deadtwenty crimesago. 

If ever you condeſcend to talk familiarly with him again, aſk him after Miſs Betterton, and what became of her: And if he ſhuffle and prevaricate, queſtion him about Miſs Lockyer.—O my dear, the man's a villain! 

I will have your uncle ſounded, as you deſire, and that out of hand. But yet I am afraid of the ſucceſs;and this for ſeveral reaſons. 'Tis hard to ſay what the ſacrifice of your eſtate would do with ſome people: And yet I muſt not, when it comes to the teſt, permit you to make it. 

As your Hannah continues ill, I would adviſe you to try to attach Dorcas to your intereſt. Have you not been impoliticly ſhy of her? 

I wiſh you could come at ſome of his letters. Surely a man of his negligent character cannot be always guarded. If he were, and if you cannot engage your ſervant, I ſhould ſuſpect them both. Let him be called upon at a ſhort warning when he is writing, or when he has papers lying about, and ſo ſurprize him into negligence. 

Such inquiries, I know, are of the ſame nature with thoſe we make at an inn in travelling, when we look into every corner and cloſet for fear of a villain; yet ſhould be frighted out of our wits, were we to find one. But 'tis better to detect ſuch a one when awake and up, than to be attacked by him when in bed and aſleep. 

I am glad you have your cloaths. But no money; no books; but aSpira,aDrexelius,and aPractice of Piety.Thoſe who ſent the latter, ought to have kept it for themſelves.—But I muſt hurry myſelf from this ſubject. 

You have excceedingly alarmed me by what you hint of his attempt to get one of my letters. I am aſſured by my new informant, that he is the head of a gang of wretches [Thoſe he brought you among, no doubt, were ſome of them], who join together to betray innocent creatures, and to ſupport one another, when they have done, by violence: And were he to come at the knowlege of the freedoms I take with him, I ſhould be afraid to ſtir out without a guard. 

I am ſorry to tell you, that I have reaſon to think, that your brother has not laid aſide his fooliſh plot. A ſun-burnt, ſailor-looking fellow was with me juſtnow, pretending great ſervice to you from Captain Singleton, could he be admitted to your ſpeech. I pleaded ignorance. The fellow was too well inſtructed for me to get any thing out of him. 

I wept for two hours inceſſantly, on reading yours, which incloſed that from your couſin MordenSee Vol.III.Letterslxxviii.lxxix.. My deareſt creature, do not deſert yourſelf: Let your Anna Howe obey the call of that friendſhip, which has united us as one ſoul, and endeavour to give you conſolation. 

I wonder not at the melancholy reflections you ſo often caſt upon yourſelf in your letters, for the ſtep you have been forced upon, on one hand, and tricked into on the other. A ſtrange fatality! As if it were deſigned to ſhew the vanity of all human prudence. I wiſh, my dear, as you hint, that both you and I have not too much prided ourſelves in a perhaps too conſcious ſuperiority over others—But I will ſtop—How apt are weak minds to look out for judgments in any extraordinary event! 'Tis ſo far right, that it is better, and ſafer, and juſter, to arraign ourſelves, or our deareſt friends, than Providence; which muſt always have wiſe ends to anſwer in its diſpenſations. 

But do not talk, as in one of your former, of being a warningonlySee Vol.III.p.153..—You will be as excellent an example, as ever you hoped to be, as well as a warning: And that will make your ſtory, to all that ſhall come to know it, of double efficacy: For were it that ſuch a merit as yours could not enſure to herſelf noble and generous uſage from a libertine heart, who will expect any tolerable behaviour from men of his character? 

If YOU think yourſelf inexcuſable for taking a ſtep that put you into the way of deluſion, without any intention to go off with him, what muſt thoſe giddy creatures think of themſelves, who, without half your provocations and inducements, and without any regardto decorum, leap walls, drop from windows, and ſteal away from their parents houſe, to the ſeducer's bed, in the ſame day? 

Again, if YOU are ſo ready to accuſe yourſelf for diſpenſing with the prohibitions of the moſt unreaſonable parents, which yet were but half-prohibitions at firſt, what ought thoſe to do, who wilfully ſhut their ears to the advice of the moſt reaſonable; and that, perhaps, where apparent ruin, or undoubted inconvenience, is the conſequence of the predetermin'd raſhneſs? 

And, laſtly, to all who will know your ſtory, you will be an excellentexampleof watchfulneſs, and of that caution and reſerve, by which a prudent perſon, who has been ſuppoſed to be a little miſled, endeavours to mend her error; and, never once loſing ſight of her duty, does all in her power to recover the path ſhe has been rather driven out of, than choſen to ſwerve from. 

Come, come, my deareſt friend, conſider but theſe things; and ſteadily, without deſponding, purſue your earneſt purpoſes to amend what you think has been amiſs; and it may not be a misfortune in the end, that you have erred; eſpecially as ſo little of your will was in your error. 

And, indeed, I muſt ſay, that I uſe the wordsmiſled,anderror,and ſuch-like, only in compliment to your own too ready ſelf-accuſations, and to the opinion of one to whom I owe duty: For I think in my conſcience, that every part of your conduct is defenſible; and that thoſe only are blameable, who have no other way to clear themſelves, than by condemning you. 

I expect, however, that ſuch melancholy reflections, as drop from your pen but too often, wil•mingle with all your future pleaſures, were you to marry I ovelace, and were he to make the beſt of huſbands. 

You was immenſely happy, above the happineſs of a mortal creature, before you knew him: Everybody almoſt worſhiped you: Envy itſelf, which has of late reared up its venomous head againſt you, was awed by your ſuperior worthineſs, into ſilence and admiration. You was the ſoul of every company where you viſited: Your elders have I ſeen declining to offer their opinions upon a ſubject, till you had delivered yours; often to ſave themſelves the mortification of retractingtheirs,when they heardyours.Yet, in all this, your ſweetneſs of manners, your humility and affability, cauſed the ſubſcription every one made to your ſentiments, and to your ſuperiority, to be equally unfeigned and unheſitating; for they ſaw, that their applauſe, and the preference they gave you to themſelves, ſubjected not themſelves to inſults, nor exalted you into any viſible triumph over them; for you had always ſomething to ſay, on every point you carried, that raiſed the yielding heart, and left everyone pleaſed and ſatisfied with themſelves, tho' they carried not off the palm. 

Your works were ſhewn, or referred to, whereever fine works were talked of. Nobody had any but an inferior and ſecond-hand praiſe for diligence, for oeconomy, for reading, for writing, for memory, for facility in learning every-thing laudable, and even for the more envied graces of perſon and dreſs, and an all-ſurpaſſing elegance in both, where you were known, and thoſe ſubjects talked of. 

The Poor bleſſed you every ſtep you trod: The Rich thought you their honour, and took a pride, that they were not obliged to deſcend from their own claſs, for an example that did credit to it. 

Tho' all men wiſhed for you, and ſought you, young as you was, yet, had not thoſe, who were brought to addreſs you, been encouraged out of ſordid and ſpiteful views to attempt your preſence, notone of them would have dared to lift up his eyes to you. 

Thus happy in all about you, thus making happy all within your circle, could you think that nothing would happen to you, to convince you, that you were not to be exempted from the common lot?—To convince you, that you were notabſolutelyperfect; and that you muſt not expect to paſs thro' life, without trial, temptation, and misfortune? 

Indeed, it muſt be owned, that no trial, no temptation, worthy of you, could have well attacked you ſooner, or more effectually, than thoſe heavy ones have done: For every common caſe you were ſuperior to: It muſt be ſome man, or ſome worſe ſpirit in the ſhape of one, that, formed on purpoſe, was to be ſent to invade you; while as many other ſuch ſpirits, as there are perſons in your family, were permitted to take poſſeſſion, ſeverally, in one dark hour, of the heart of every one of it, there to ſit perching, perhaps, and directing every motion to the motions of the ſeducer without, in order to irritate, to provoke, to puſh you forward to meet him. 

So, upon the whole, there ſeems, as I have often ſaid, a kind of fate in your error, if an error; and this, perhaps, admitted, for the ſake of a better example to be collected from yourſufferings,than could have been given, had younever erred:For, my dear, ADVERSITY is your SHINING-TIME: I ſee evidently, that it muſt call forth graces and beauties, that could not have been ſeen in a run of that proſperous fortune, which attended you from your cradle till now; admirably as you became, and, as we all thought, greatly as you deſerved, that proſperity. 

All the matter is, the trial muſt be grievous to you: It is tome:It is to all who love you, and looked upon you as one ſet aloft to be admired and imitated, and not as a mark, as you have lately found, for Envy to ſhoot its ſhafts at. 

Let what I have written above, have its due weight•ith you, my dear; and then, as warm imaginations•re not without a mixture of enthuſiaſm, your Anna•owe, who, on reperuſal of it, imagines it to be in•ſtyle ſuperior to her uſual ſtyle, will be ready to flat•er herſelf, that ſhe has been in a manner inſpired with the hints that have comforted and raiſed the de•ected heart of her ſuffering friend; who, from ſuch•ard trials, in a bloom ſo tender, may find at times•er ſpirits ſunk too low to enable her to pervade the•urrounding darkneſs, which conceals from her the•opeful dawning of the better day which awaits her. 

I will add no more at preſent, than that I am 

Your ever-faithful and affectionateANNA HOWE.LETTER V. MiſsCLARISSA HARLOWE,To MiſsHOWE.
Friday, May12.I Muſt be ſilent, my exalted friend, under praiſes that oppreſs my heart with a conſciouſneſs of not deſerving them; at the ſame time, that the generous deſign of thoſe praiſes raiſes and comforts it: For it is a charming thing to ſtand high in the opinion of thoſe we love: And to find that there are ſouls that can carry their friendſhips beyond accidents, beyond body, and ties of blood. Whatever, my deareſt creature, ismyſhining-time, the adverſity of a friend isyours.And it would be almoſt a fault in me to regret thoſe afflictions, which give you an opportunity ſo gloriouſly to exert thoſe qualities, which not only ennoble our ſex, but dignify human nature. 

But let me proceed to ſubjects leſs agreeable. 

I am ſorry you have reaſon to think Singleton's projects are not at an end. But who knows what the ſailor had to propoſe?—Yet had any good been intendedme, this method would hardly have been fallen upon. 

Depend upon it, my dear, your letters ſhall be ſafe. 

I have made a handle of Mr. Lovelace's bold attempt and freedom, as I told you I would, to keep him ever ſince at diſtance, that I may have an opportunity to ſee the ſucceſs of the application to my uncle, and to be at liberty to embrace any favourable overtures that may ariſe from it. Yet he has been very importunate, and twice brought Mr. Mennell from Mrs. Fretchville, to talk about the houſe. If I ſhould be obliged to make up with him again, I ſhall think I am always doing myſelf a ſpight. 

As to what you mention of his newly-detected crimes; and your advice to attach Dorcas; and to come at ſome of his letters; theſe things will require more or leſs of my attention, as I may hope favour, or not, from my uncle Harlowe. 

I am ſorry for poor Hannah's continued illneſs. Pray, my dear, inform yourſelf, for me, whether ſhe wants any thing that befits her caſe. 

I will not cloſe this letter till to-morrow is over; for I am reſolved to go to church; and this as well for the ſake of my duty, as to ſee, if I am at liberty to go out when I pleaſe, without being attended or accompanied. 

Sunday, May14.I HAVE not been able to avoid a ſhort debate with Mr. Lovelace. I had order'd a coach to the door. When I had notice that it was come, I went out of my chamber, to go to it; but met him dreſſed on the ſtairs head, with a book in his hand, but without his hat and ſword.—He aſked, with an air very ſolemn, yet reſpectful, if I were going abroad. I told him! was. He deſired leave to attend me, if I were going to church. I refuſed him. And then he complained heavily of my treatment of him; and declared that hewould not live ſuch another week, as the paſt, for the world. 

I owned to him very frankly, that I had made an application to my friends; and that I was reſolved to keep myſelf to myſelf till I knew the iſſue of it. 

He coloured, and ſeemed ſurprized. But checking himſelf in ſomething he was going to ſay, he pleaded my danger from Singleton, and again deſired to attend me. 

And then he told me, that Mrs. Fretchville had deſired to continue a fortnight longer in the houſe. She found, ſaid he, that I was unable to determine about entering upon it; and now who knows when ſuch a vapouriſh creature will come to a reſolution? This, Madam, has been an unhappy week; for had I not ſtood upon ſuch bad terms with you, you might have been now miſtreſs of that houſe; and probably had my couſin Montague, if not my aunt Lawrance, actually with you. 

And ſo, Sir, taking all you ſay for granted, your couſin Montague cannot come to Mrs. Sinclair's? What, pray, is her objection to Mrs. Sinclair's? Is this houſe fit for me to live in a month or two, and not fit for any of your relations for a few days?—And Mrs. Fretchville has taken more time too—And ſo, puſhing by him, I hurried down ſtairs. 

He called to Dorcas to bring him his ſword and hat; and following me down into the paſſage, placed himſelf between me and the door; and again beſought me to permit him to attend me. 

Mrs. Sinclair came out at that inſtant, and aſked me, If I did not chooſe a diſh of chocolate? 

I wiſh, Mrs. Sinclair, ſaid I, you would take this man in with you to your chocolate. I don't know whether I am at liberty to ſtir out without his leave or not—Then turning to him, I asked, If he kept me there his priſoner? 

Dorcas juſt then bringing him his ſword and hat, he opened the ſtreet-door, and taking my reſiſting hand, led me, in a very obſequious manner, to the coach. People paſſing by, ſtopt, ſtared, and whiſper'd—But he is ſo graceful in his perſon and dreſs, that he generally takes every eye. 

I was uneaſy to be ſo gaz'd at; and he ſtepp'd in after me, and the coachman drove to St. Paul's. 

He was very full of aſſiduities all the way; while I was as reſerv'd as poſſible: And when I return'd, din'd, as I had done the greateſt part of the week, by myſelf. 

He told me, upon my reſolving to do ſo, that altho' he would continue his paſſive obſervance, till I knew the iſſue of my application; yet I muſt expect, that then I ſhould never reſt one moment till I had fixed his happy day: For that his very ſoul was fretted with my ſlights, reſentments, and delays. 

A wretch! when I can ſay, to my infinite regret, on adoubleaccount, that all he complains of is owing to himſelf! 

O that I may have good tidings from my uncle! 

Adieu, my deareſt friend!—This ſhall lie ready for an exchange, as I hope for one to-morrow from you, that will decide, as I may ſay, the deſtiny of 

YourCLARISSA HARLOWE.LETTER VI. MiſsHOWE,To Mrs.JUDITH NORTON.
Good Mrs. Norton,Thurſday, May11.CANNOT you, without namingmeas an adviſer, who am hated by the family, contrive a way to let Mrs. Harlowe know, that in an accidental converſation with me, you had been aſſured, that my beloved friend pines after a reconciliation with her relations: That ſhe has hitherto, in hopes of it, refuſedto enter into any obligations, that ſhall be in the leaſt an hindrance to it: That ſhe would fain avoid giving Mr. Lovelace a right to make her family uneaſy, in relation to her grandfather's eſtate: That all ſhe wiſhes for ſtill, is to be indulged in her choice of a ſingle life, and, on that condition, would make her father's pleaſure hers with regard to that eſtate: That Mr. Lovelace is continually preſſing her to marry him; and all his friends likewiſe: But that I am ſure, ſhe has ſo little liking to the man, becauſe of his faulty morals, and of her relations antipathy to him, that if ſhe had any hope given her of a reconciliation, ſhe would forego all thoughts of him, and put herſelf into her father's protection. But that their reſolution muſt be ſpeedy; for otherwiſe ſhe would find herſelf obliged to give way to his preſſing intreaties; and it might then be out of her power to prevent diſagreeable litigations. 

I do aſſure you, Mrs. Norton, upon my honour, that our deareſt friend knows nothing of this procedure of mine: And therefore it is proper to acquaint you, in confidence, with my grounds for it.—Theſe are they:— 

She had deſired me to let Mr. Hickman drop hints to the above effect to her uncle Harlowe; but indirectly as fromhimſelf,leſt, if the application ſhould not be attended with ſucceſs; and Mr. Lovelace (who already takes it ill, that he has ſo little of her favour) come to know it, ſhe may be deprived of every protection, and be perhaps ſubjected to great inconveniences from ſo haughty a ſpirit. 

Having this authority from her; and being very ſollicitous about the ſucceſs of the application, I thought, that if the weight of ſo good a wife, mother, and ſiſter, as Mrs. Harlowe is known to be, were thrown into the ſame ſcale, with that of Mr. John Harlowe (ſuppoſing hecouldbe engaged) it could hardly fail of making a due impreſſion. 

Mr. Hickman will ſee Mr. Harlowe to-morrow: By that time you may ſee Mrs. Harlowe. If Mr. Hickman finds the old gentleman favourable, he will tell him, that you will have ſeen Mrs. Harlowe upon the ſame account; and will adviſe him to join in conſultation with her how beſt to proceed to melt the moſt obdurate hearts in the world. 

This is the fair ſtate of the matter, and my true motive for writing to you. I leave all therefore to your diſcretion: And moſt heartily wiſh ſucceſs to it; being of opinion that Mr. Lovelace cannot poſſibly deſerve our admirable friend: Nor, indeed, know I the man who can. 

Pray acquaint me, by a line, of the reſult of your kind interpoſition. If it prove not ſuch, as may be reaſonably hoped for, our dear friend ſhall know nothing of this ſtep from me; and pray let her not from you. For, in that caſe, it would only give deeper grief to an heart already too much afflicted. I am, dear and worthy Mrs. Norton, 

Your true friend,ANNA HOWE.LETTER VII. Mrs.NORTON,To MiſsHOWE.
Saturday, May13.Dear Madam,MY heart is almoſt broken to be obliged to let you know, that ſuch is the ſituation of things in the family of my ever-dear Miſs Harlowe, that there can be at preſent no ſucceſs expected from any application in her favour. Her poor mother is to be pity'd. I have a moſt affecting letter from her; but muſt not communicate it to you; and ſhe forbids me to let it be known that ſhe writes upon the ſubject; although ſhe is compelled, as it were, to do it, for the eaſe of her own heart. I mention it therefore in confidence. 

I hope in God that my beloved Miſs has preſerved her honour inviolate. I hope there is not a man breathing, who could attempt a ſacrilege ſo deteſtable. I have no apprehenſion of a failure in a virtue ſo eſtabliſhed: God for ever keep ſo pure a heart out of the reach of ſurprizes and violence! Eaſe, dear Madam, I beſeech you, my over-anxious heart, by one line, by the bearer, altho' but by one line, to acquaint me, as ſurely you can, that her honour is unſully'd! If it be not, adieu to all the comforts this life can give: Since none will it be able to afford 

To the poorJUDITH NORTONLETTER VIII. MiſsHOWE,To Mrs.JUDITH NORTON.
Saturday Evening, May13.Dear good Woman,YOUR beloved's honour is inviolate!—Muſtbe inviolate! Andwillbe ſo, in ſpite of men and devils. Could I have had hope of a reconciliation, all my view was, that ſhe ſhould not have had this man!—All that can be ſaid now is, She muſt run the risk of a bad huſband: She of whom no man living is worthy. 

Youpity her mother!—So don'tI!—I pity nobody, that puts it out of their power to ſhew maternal love, and humanity, in order to patch up for themſelves a precarious and ſorry quiet, which every blaſt of wind ſhall diſturb! 

I hate tyrants in every form and ſhape: But paternal and maternal tyrants are the worſt of all: For they can have no bowels. 

I repeat, that I pitynoneof them!—My beloved and your belovedonlydeſerves pity. She had never been in the hands of this man, but for them. She is quite blameleſs. You don't know all her ſtory. Were I to tell you ſhe had no intention to go off with this man, it would avail her nothing. It would onlycondemn thoſe who drove her to extremities; and him, who now muſt be her refuge. I am 

Your ſincere friend and ſervant,ANNA HOWE.LETTER IX. Mrs.HARLOWE,To Mrs.NORTON.
[Not communicated till the hiſtory came to be compiled.] 

Saturday, May13.I Return an anſwer in writing, as I promiſed, to your communication. But take no notice, that I do write, either to my Bella's Betty, who I underſtand, ſometimes viſits you, or to the poor wretch herſelf; nor to any-body. I charge you don't. My heart is full. Writing may give ſome vent to my griefs, and perhaps I may write what lies moſt upon my heart, without confining myſelf ſtrictly to the preſent ſubject. 

You know how dear this ingrateful creature ever was to us all. You know how ſincerely we joined with every one of thoſe who ever had ſeen her, or converſed with her, to praiſe and admire her; and exceeded in our praiſe even the bounds of that modeſty, which, becauſe ſhe was our own, ſhould have reſtrained us; being of opinion, that to have been ſilent in the praiſe of ſo apparent a merit, muſt rather have argued blindneſs or affectation in us, than that we ſhould incur the cenſure of vain partiality to our own. 

When therefore any-body congratulated us on ſuch a daughter, we received their congratulations without any diminution. If it was ſaid, You are happy in this child, we owned, that no parents ever were happierina child. If more particularly, they praiſed her dutiful behaviour to us, we ſaid, She knew not how to offend. If it was ſaid, Miſs Clariſſa Harlowe hasa wit and penetration beyond her years; we, inſtead of diſallowing it, would add,—And a judgment no leſs extraordinary than her wit. If her prudence was praiſed, and a forethought, which every one ſaw ſupply'd what only years and experience gave to others; Nobody need to ſcruple taking leſſons from Miſs Clariſſa Harlowe, was our proud anſwer. 

Forgive me, O forgive me, my dear Norton—But I know you will—For yours, when good, was this child, and your glory as well as mine! 

But have you not heard ſtrangers, as ſhe paſſed to and from church, ſtop to praiſe the angel of a creature, as they called her; when it was enough for thoſe who knew who ſhe was, to cry,Why, it is Miſs Clariſſa Harlowe!—As if every-body were obliged to know, or to have heard of Miſs Clariſſa Harlowe, and of her excellencies. While, accuſtom'd to praiſe, it was too familiar to her, to cauſe her to alter either her look or her pace. 

For my own part, I could not ſtifle a pleaſure, that had perhaps a faulty vanity for its foundation, whenever I was ſpoken of, or addreſſed to, as the mother of ſo ſweet a child: Mr. Harlowe and I, all the time, loving each other the better for the ſhare each had in ſuch a daughter. 

Still, ſtill, indulge the fond, the overflowing heart of a mother! I could dwell for ever upon the remembrance of what ſhewas,would but that remembrance baniſh from my mind what ſheis! 

In her boſom, young as ſhe was, could I repoſe all my griefs—Sure of receiving fromherprudence, advice as well as comfort: And both inſinuated in ſo humble, in ſo dutiful a manner, that it was impoſſible to take thoſe exceptions which the diſtance of years and character between a mother and a daughter, would, from any other daughter, have made one apprehenſive of. She was our glory when abroad, our delight when at home. Every-body was even covetousof her company; and we grudg'd her to our brothers Harlowe, and to our ſiſter and brother Hervey.—No other contention among us, then, but who ſhould be favoured by her next.—No chiding ever knew ſhe from us, but the chiding of lovers, when ſhe was for ſhutting herſelf up too long together from us, in purſuit of thoſe charming amuſements, and uſeful employments, which, however, the whole family was the better for. 

Our other children had reaſon, good children as they always were, to think themſelves neglected. But they likewiſe were ſo ſenſible of their ſiſter's ſuperiority, and of the honour ſhe reflected upon the whole family, that they confeſſed themſelves eclipſed, without envying the eclipſer. Indeed there was not any-body ſo equal with her, in their own opinions, as to envy what all aſpired but to emulate.—The dear creature, you know, my Norton, gave an eminence to us all: And now, that ſhe has left us, ſo diſgracefully left us! we are ſtript of our ornament, and are but a common family! 

Then her acquirements. Her ſkill in muſic, her fine needleworks, her elegance in dreſs; for which ſhe was ſo much admired, that the neighbouring ladies uſed to ſay, that they need not fetch faſhions from London; ſince whatever Miſs Clariſſa Harlowe wore, was thebeſtfaſhion, becauſe her choice ofnaturalbeauties ſet thoſe ofartfar behind them. Her genteel eaſe, and fine turn of perſon; her deep reading; and theſe, joined to her open manners, and her chearful modeſty—O my good Norton, what a ſweet child wasoncemy Clary Harlowe! 

This, and more,youknew her to be: For many of her excellencies were owing to yourſelf; and with the milk you gave her, you gave her what no other nurſe in the world could give her. 

And do you think, my worthy woman, do you think, that the wilful lapſe of ſuch a child is to beforgiven? Can ſhe herſelf think, that ſhe deſerves not the ſevereſt puniſhment for the abuſe of ſuch talents as were intruſted to her? 

Her fault was a fault of premeditation, of cunning, of contrivance. She has deceived every-body's expectations. Her whole ſex, as well as the family ſhe ſprung from, is diſgraced by it. 

Would any-body ever have believed, that ſuch a young creature as this, who had by her advice ſaved even her over-lively friend from marrying a fop, and a libertine, would herſelf have gone off with one of the vileſt and moſt notorious of libertines? A man whoſe character ſhe knew; and knew to be worſe than his ſhe ſaved her friend from; whoſe vices ſhe was warned of: One who had had her brother's life in his hands; and who conſtantly ſet our whole family at defiance. 

Think for me, my good Norton; think what my unhappineſs muſt be, both as a wife and a mother. What reſtleſs days, what ſleepleſs nights; yet my own rankling anguiſh endeavoured to be ſmoothed over, to ſoften the anguiſh of fiercer ſpirits, and to keep them from blazing out to further miſchief. O this naughty, naughty girl! whoknewſo well what ſhe did; and who could look ſo far into conſequences, that we thought ſhe would have dy'd, rather than have done as ſhe has done! 

Her known character for prudence leaves no plea for excuſe. How then can I offer to plead for her, if, thro' motherly indulgence, I would forgive her myſelf?—And have we not, moreover, ſuffer'd all the diſgrace that can befal us? Has not ſhe? 

Ifnow,ſhe has ſo little liking to his morals, had ſhe not reaſonbeforeto haveaslittle? Or has ſhe ſuffered by them in her own perſon?—O my good woman, I doubt—I doubt—Will not the character of the man make one doubt an angel, if once in his power? The world will think the worſt. I am tolditdoes.So likewiſe her father fears; her brother hears; and what can I do? 

Ourantipathyto him ſhe knew before, as well as his character. Theſe therefore cannot be new motives without a new reaſon.—O my dear Mrs. Norton, how ſhallI,how canyou,ſupport ourſelves under the apprehenſions that theſe thoughts lead to, of my Clary Harlowe, and your Clary Harlowe! 

He continually preſſing her,you ſay,to marry him. His friends likewiſe.She has reaſon, no doubt ſhe has reaſon, for this application to us: And her crime is gloſs'd over, to bring her to us with new diſgrace!—Whither, whither, does one guilty ſtep lead the miſguided heart!—And now truly, to ſave a ſtubborn ſpirit, we are only to beſounded,that the application may be retracted or deny'd! 

Upon the whole: Were I inclined to plead for her, it isnowthe moſt improper of all times.Nowthat my brother Harlowe has diſcouraged (as he laſt night came hither on purpoſe to tell us) Mr. Hickman's inſinuated application; and been applauded for it.Now,that my brother Antony is intending to carry his great fortune, thro' her fault, into another family:—She expecting, no doubt, herſelf, to be put into her grandfather's eſtate, in conſequence of a reconciliation, and as a reward for her fault: And inſiſting ſtill upon terms, that ſhe offer'd before, and were rejected.—Not thro' my fault, I am ſure, rejected. 

From all theſe things, you will return ſuch an anſwer as the caſe requires.—It might coſt me the peace of my whole life, at this time, to move for her. God forgive her!—If I do, nobody elſe will. And let it be for your own ſake, as well as mine, a ſecret that you and I have enter'd upon this ſubject. And I deſire you not to touch upon it again but by particular permiſſion: For, O my dear good woman, it ſets my heart a-bleeding in as many ſtreams as there are veins in it! 

Yet think me not impenetrable by a proper contrition and remorſe! But what a torment is it to have a will without a power! 

Adieu! adieu! God give us both comfort; and to the once dear—the ever-dear creature (for can a mother forget her child?), repentance, deep repentance! And as little ſuffering as may befit his bleſſed will, and her grievous fault, prays 

Your real friend,CHARLOTTE HARLOWE.LETTER X. MiſsHOWE,To MiſsCLARISSA HARLOWE.
Sunday, May14.HOW it is now, my dear, between you and Mr. Lovelace, I cannot tell. But wicked as the man is, I am afraid he muſt be your lord and maſter. 

I called him by ſeveral very hard names in my laſt. I had but juſt heard ſome of his vileneſſes, when I ſat down to write; ſo my indignation was raiſed. But on inquiry, and recollection, I find that the facts laid to his charge were all of them committed ſome time ago; not ſince he has hadſtronghopes of your favour. This is ſaying ſomething for him. His generous behaviour to the innkeeper's daughter, is a more recent inſtance to his credit; to ſay nothing of the univerſal good character he has as a kind landlord. And then I approve much of the motion he made to put you in poſſeſſion of Mrs. Fretchville's houſe, while he continues at the other widow's, till you agree that one houſe ſhall hold you. I wiſh this was done. Be ſure you embrace this offer, if you do not ſoon meet at the altar, and get one of his couſins with you. 

Were you once marry'd, I ſhould think you cannot beveryunhappy, tho' you n•not be ſo happy with him as you deſerve to be.〈◊〉ſtake he has inhis country, and his reverſions: The care he takes of his affairs; his freedom from obligation; nay, his pride, with your merit, muſt be a tolerable ſecurity for you, I ſhould think. Tho' particulars of his wickedneſs, as they come to my knowlege, hurt and incenſe me; yet, after all, when I give myſelf time to reflect, all that I have heard of him, to his diſadvantage, was comprehended in the general character given of him long ago, by his uncle's and his own diſmiſs'd bailiffVol.I.p.22., and which was confirm'd to you by Mrs. GremeVol.III.p.48.. 

You can have nothing therefore, I think, to be deeply concerned about, but his future good, and the bad example he may hereafter ſet to his own family. Theſe indeed are very juſt concerns: But were you toleavehim now, eitherwithorwithouthis conſent, his fortune and alliances ſo conſiderable, his perſon and addreſs ſo engaging (every-one excuſing you now on thoſe accounts, and becauſe of your relations follies), it would have a very ill appearance for your reputation. I cannot therefore, on the moſt deliberate conſideration, adviſe you to think of that, while you have no reaſon to doubt his honour. May eternal vengeance purſue the villain, if he gives room for an apprehenſion of this nature! 

Yet his teazing ways are intolerable: His acquieſcence with your ſlight delays, and his reſignedneſs to the diſtance you now keep him at (for a fault ſo much ſlighter, as he muſt think, than the puniſhment), are unaccountable: He doubts your love ofhim,that is very probable; but you have reaſon to be ſurpriſed athiswant of ardour; a bleſſing ſo great, within hisreach,as I may ſay. 

By the time you have read to this place, you will have no doubt of what has been the iſſue of the conference between theTwo Gentlemen.I am equally ſhock'd, and enraged againſt them All: Againſt themAll,I ſay; for I have try'd your good Norton's weight with your mother, to the ſame purpoſe as the gentleman ſounded your uncle.—Never were there ſuch determin'd brutes in the world! Why ſhould I mince the matter? Yet would I fain, methinks, make an exception for your mother. 

Your uncle will have it, that you are ruin'd.'He can believe every-thing bad of a creature, who could run away with a man—With ſuch a one eſpecially as Lovelace. They allexpectedapplications from you, when ſome heavy diſtreſs had fallen upon you.—But they were all reſolved not to ſtir an inch in your favour; no, not to ſave your life!' 

My deareſt ſoul! reſolve to aſſert your right. Claim your own, and go and live upon it, as you ought. Then, if you marry not, how will the wretches creep to you, for your reverſionary diſpoſitions! 

You were accuſed (as in your aunt's letter)'of premeditation and contrivance in your eſcape.'Inſtead of pityingyou,the mediating perſon was called upon'to pitythem; who once, he ſaid, doted upon you: Who took no joy but in your preſence: Who devour'd your words as you ſpoke them: Who trod over again your footſteps, as you walked before them.'—And I know not what of this ſort. 

Upon the whole, it is now evident to me, and ſo it muſt be to you, when you read this letter, that you have but one choice. And the ſooner you make it the better.—Shall we ſuppoſe that it is not in your power to make it?—I cannot have patience to ſuppoſe that. 

I am concern'd, methinks, to know how you will do to condeſcend, now you ſee you muſt be his, after you have kept him at ſuch a diſtance; and for the revenge his pride may put him upon taking for it. But let me tell you, that if my going up, and ſhareing fortunes with you, will prevent ſuch a noble creature from ſtooping too low; much more, were itlikely to prevent your ruin, I would not heſitate a moment about it. What's the whole world to me, weigh'd againſt ſuch a friendſhip as ours?—Think you, that any of the enjoyments of this life, could be enjoyments to me, were ſuch a friend as you to be involved in calamities, which I could either relieve her from, or alleviate, by giving them up? And what in ſaying this, and acting up to it, do I offer you, but the fruits of a friendſhip your worth has created? 

Excuſe my warmth of expreſſion. The warmth of my heart wants none. I am enraged at your relations; for, bad as what I have mentioned is, I have not told you all; nor now, perhaps, ever will:—I am angry at my own mother's narrowneſs of mind, and adherence to old notions indiſcriminately—And I am exaſperated againſt your fooliſh, your low-vanity'd Lovelace!—But let us ſtoop to take the wretch as he is, and make the beſt of him, ſince you are deſtin'd to ſtoop, to keep grovelers and worldlings in countenance. He has not been guilty of direct indecency to you. Nordarehe. Not ſo much of a devil as that comes to neither!—Had he ſuch villainous intentions, ſo much in his power as you are, they would have ſhewn themſelves before now to ſuch a penetrating and vigilant eye, and to ſuch a pure heart as yours. Let us ſave the wretch then, if we can, tho' we ſoil our fingers in lifting him up from his dirt. 

There is yet, to a perſon of your fortune and independence, a good deal to do, if you enter upon thoſe terms, whichoughtto be enter'd upon. I don't find, that he has once talked of ſettlements; much leſs of the licence. It is hard! But as your evil deſtiny has thrown you out of all other protection and medi•tion, you muſt be father, mother, uncle to yourſelf, and enter upon the requiſite points for yourſelf. Indeed you muſt. Your ſituation requires it. What room for delicacy now? Or would you havemewrite to the wretch? Yet that would be the ſame thing, as if you were to write yourſelf. Yet write you ſhould, I think, if you cannot ſpeak. But ſpeaking is certainly beſt: For words leave no traces; they paſs as breath; and mingle with air; and may be explained with latitude. But the pen is a witneſs on record. 

I know the gentleneſs of your ſpirit; I know the laudable pride of your heart; and the juſt notion you have of the dignity of our ſex, in theſe delicate points. But once more, all this is nothing now: Your honour is concerned, that the dignity I ſpeak of, ſhould not be ſtood upon. 

'Mr. Lovelace,' would I ſay; yet hate the fooliſh fellow, for his low, his ſtupid pride, in wiſhing to triumph over the dignity of his own wife;— 'I am deprived, by your means, of every friend I have in the world. In what light am I to look uponyou?I have well conſider'd of every thing: You have made ſome people, much againſt my liking, think me awife:Others know I amnotmarried; nor do I deſire any body ſhould believe Iam.Do you think your being here in the ſame houſe with me, can be to my reputation? You talk to me of Mrs. Fretchville's houſe—" [This will bring him to renew his laſt diſcourſe on that ſubject, if he does not revive it of himſelf.] 'If Mrs. Fretchville knows not her own mind, what is her houſe to me? You talked of bringing up your couſin Montague to bear me company: If my brother's ſchemes be your pretence for not going yourſelf tofetch her,you canwriteto her.—I inſiſt upon bringing theſe two points to an iſſue: Off or on, ought to be indifferent tome,if ſo tothem.' 

Such a declaration muſt bring all forward. There are twenty ways, my dear, that you would find out to adviſe another how to act in your circumſtances. He will diſdain, from his native inſolence, to have it thought hehasany-bodyto conſult. Well then, will he not be obliged to declare himſelf? And if hedoes,no delays on your ſide, I beſeech you. Give him the day: Let it be a ſhort one. It would be derogating from your own merit, andhonourtoo, let me tell you, even altho' he ſhouldnotbe ſo explicit as he ought to be, to ſeem but to doubt his meaning; and to wait for that explanation which I ſhould for ever deſpiſe him for, if he makes neceſſary. Twice already have you, my dear, if not oftener,modeſty'daway ſuch opportunities as you ought not to have ſlipt.—As to ſettlements, if they come not in naturally, e'en leave them to his own juſtice, and to the juſtice of his family. And there's an end of the matter. 

This ismyadvice: Mend it, as circumſtances offer, and followyour own.But indeed, my dear, this, or ſomething like it, would I do. As witneſs 

YourANNA HOWE.Incloſed in the above.
I Muſt trouble you with my concerns, tho' your own are ſo heavy upon you.—A piece of news I have to tell you. Your uncle Antony is diſpoſed to marry.—With whom, think you?—With my mamma. True indeed. Your family know it. All is laid with redoubled malice at your door. And there theold ſoulhimſelf lays it. 

Take no notice of this intelligence, not ſo much as in your letters to me, for fear of accidents. 

I think it can't do. But were I to provoke my mother, that might afford a pretence. Elſe, I ſhould have been with you before now, I fancy. 

The firſt likelihood that appears to me of encouragement, I diſmiſs Hickman, that's certain. If my mother diſoblige me in ſo important an article, I ſhan't think of obliging her in ſuch another. It is impoſſible, ſurely, that the deſire of popping me off to that honeſt man can be with ſuch a view. 

I repeat, that it cannot come to any thing. But theſewidows—Then ſuch a love in us all, both old and young, of being courted and admired!—And ſo irreſiſtible to theirelderſhipsto be flatter'd, that all power is not over with them; but that they may ſtill claſs and prank it with their daughters. It vexed me heartily to have her tell me of this propoſal with ſelf-complaiſant ſimperings; and yet ſhe affected to ſpeak of it, as if ſhe had no intention to encourage it. 

Theſe antiquated batchelors, old before they think themſelves ſo, imagine, that when they have once perſuadedthemſelves,they have nothing elſe to do, but to make their minds known to the lady. His overgrown fortune is indeed a bait—a tempting one. A ſaucy daughter to be got rid of! The memory of the father of that daughter not precious enough to weigh!—But let him advance if he dare—Let her encourage—But I hope ſhe won't. 

Excuſe me, my dear. I am nettled. They have fearfully rumpled my gorget. You'll think me faulty. So I won't put my name to this ſeparate paper. Other hands may reſemble mine. You did not ſee me write it. 

LETTER XI. MiſsCLARISSA HARLOWE,To MiſsHOWE.
Monday, P. M. May15.NOW indeed, is it evident, my beſt, my only friend, that I have but one choice to make. And now do I find, that I have carried my reſentment againſt this man too far; ſince now I am to appear as if under an obligation to his patience with me for a conduct, that, perhaps, he will think, if not humourſome and childiſh, plainly demonſtrative of my little eſteem of him; of but a ſecondary eſteem at leaſt, where before, his pride, rather thanhis merit, had made him expect afirſt.O my dear!—to be under obligation to, and to be caſt upon a man, that is not agenerousman!—That is, indeed, acruelman!—That is capable of creating a diſtreſs to a young creature, who by her evil deſtiny, is thrown into his power; and then ofenjoyingit, as I may ſay! [I verily think I may ſay ſo, of this ſavage!]—What a fate is mine! 

You give me, my dear, good advice, as to the peremptory manner in which I ought to treat him: But do you conſider to whom it is that you give that advice? 

The occaſion for it ſhould never have been given byme,of all creatures; for I am unequal, utterly unequal to it!—What,I,to challenge a man for a huſband!—I,to exert myſelf to quicken the delayer in his reſolutions! And, having loſt an opportunity, to begin to try to recal it, asfrom myſelf,andfor myſelf!—Tothreatenhim, as I may ſay, into the marriage-ſtate!—O my dear! if this be right to be done, how difficult is it, where Modeſty and Self (or where Pride, if you pleaſe) is concerned to do that right? Or, to expreſs myſelf in your words, to be father, mother, uncle, to myſelf!—Eſpecially where one thinks a triumph over one is intended.—Do, my dear, adviſe me, perſuade me, to renounce the man for ever: And then I will for ever renounce him! 

You ſay, you have tried Mrs. Norton's weight with my mamma.—Bad as the returns are which my application by Mr. Hickman has met with, you tell me, you have not acquainted me with all the bad; nor now, perhaps, ever will. But why ſo, my dear? Whatisthe bad, whatcanbe the bad, which now you will never tell me of?—What worſe, than renounce me! and for ever!'My uncle, you ſay, believes me ruin'd: He declares, that he can believe every thing bad of a creature, who could run away with a man:And they have all made a reſolution, not to ſtir an inch in my favour; no, not to ſave my life." 

Have you worſe than this, my dear, behind?—Surely my father has not renewed his dreadful malediction!—Surely, if ſo, my mamma has not joined in it! Have my uncles given it their ſanction, and made it a family act! What, my dear, is the worſt, that you will leave for ever unrevealed? 

O Lovelace! why comeſt thou not juſt now; while theſe black proſpects are before me? For now, couldſt thou look into my heart, wouldſt thou ſee a diſtreſs worthy of thy barbarous triumph! 

I WAS forced to quit my pen. 

And you ſay you have try'd Mrs. Norton's weight with my mamma? 

Whatisdone, cannot be help'd: But I wiſh you had not taken any ſtep, in a matter ſo very concerning to me, without firſt conſulting me.—Forgive me, my dear;—but that high-ſoul'd and noble friendſhip, which you avow with ſo obliging, and ſo uncommon a warmth, at the ſame time, that it is the ſubject of my grateful admiration, is no leſs, becauſe of its fervor, the ground of my apprehenſion! 

Well, but now, to look forward, you are of opinion, that I muſt be his: And that I cannot leave him with reputation to myſelf, whether with or without his conſent. I muſt, if ſo, make the beſt of the bad matter. 

He went out in the morning; intending not to return to dinner, unleſs (as he ſent me word) I would admit him to dine with me. 

I excuſed myſelf. The man, whoſe anger is now to be of ſuch high importance to me, was, it ſeems, diſpleaſed. 

As he, as well as I, expected, that I ſhould receive a letter from you this day, by Collins, I ſuppoſe he will not be long before he returns; and then, poſſibly,he is to be mighty ſtately, mightymanniſ•,mightycoy,if you pleaſe! And then muſt I be very humble, very ſubmiſſive, and try to whine myſelf into his good graces: With downcaſt eye, if not by ſpeech, beg his forgivenneſs for the diſtance I have ſo perverſely kept him at!—Yes, I warrant you!—But I'll ſee how this behaviour will ſit upon me!—You have always railly'd me upon my meekneſs, I think! Well then, I'll try, if I can be ſtill meeker, ſhall I!—O my dear!— 

But let me ſit with my hands before me, all patience, all reſignation; for I think I hear him coming up.—Or ſhall I roundly accoſt him, in the words, in the form, you, my dear, have preſcrib'd? 

He is come in.—He has ſent to me, all impatience in his aſpect, Dorcas ſays.—But I cannot, cannot ſee him! 

Monday Night.THE contents of your letter, and my own heavy reflections, render'd me incapable of ſeeing this expecting man!—The firſt word he aſked Dorcas, was, If I had received a letter ſince he had been out?—She told me this; and her anſwer, That I had; and was faſting, and had been in tears ever ſince. 

He ſent to deſire an interview with me. 

I anſwer'd by her, That I was not very well. In the morning, if better, I would ſee him as ſoon as he pleaſed. 

Very humble! was it not, my dear?—Yet he was too royal to take it for humility; for Dorcas told me, he rubb'd one ſide of his face imp•tiently; and ſaid a raſh word, and was out of humour; ſtalking about the room. 

Half an hour after, he ſent again; deſiring very earneſtly, that I would admit him to ſupper with me. He would enter upon no ſubjects of converſation, but what I ſhould lead to. 

So I ſhould have been atliberty,you ſee, tocourt him! 

I again deſired to be excuſed. 

Indeed, my dear, my eyes were ſwelled: I was very low-ſpirited; and could not think of entering all at once, after ſeveral days diſtance, into the freedom of converſation, which my friends utter rejection of me, as well as your opinion, have made neceſſary. 

He ſent up to tell me, that as he heard I was faſting, if I would promiſe to eat ſome chicken which Mrs. Sinclair had order'd for ſupper, he would acquieſce.—Very kind in his anger!—Is he not? 

I promiſed him. Can I be morepreparativelycondeſcending?—How happy, I'll warrant you, if I may meet him in a kind and forgiving humour! 

I hate myſelf!—But I won't be inſulted. Indeed I won't! for all this. 

LETTER XII. MiſsCLARISSA HARLOWE,To MiſsHOWE.
Tueſday, May16.I Think once more, we ſeem to be in a kind of train; but through a ſtorm. I will give you the particulars. 

I heard him in the dining-room at five in the morning. I had reſted very ill, and was up too: But opened not my door till ſix: When Dorcas brought me his requeſt for my company. 

He approached me, and taking my hand, as I enter'd the dining-room, I went not to bed, Madam, till two, yet ſlept not a wink. For God's ſake, torment me not, as you have done for a week paſt. 

He paus'd. I was ſilent. 

At firſt, proceeded he, I thought your reſentment of a mere unavailing curioſity could not be deep;and that it would go off of itſelf: But when I found, it was to be kept up till you knew the ſucceſs of ſome new overtures which you had made, and which comply'd with, might have deprived me of you for ever; how, Madam, could I ſupport myſelf under the thoughts of having, with ſuch an union of intereſts, made ſo little impreſſion upon your mind in my favour? 

He paus'd again. I was ſtill ſilent. He went on. 

I acknowlege that I have a proud heart, Madam. I cannot but hope for ſome inſtance of previous and preferable favour from the lady I am ambitious to call mine; and that her choice of me ſhould not appear, notflagrantlyappear, directed by the perverſeneſs of her ſelfiſh perſecutors, and my irreconcileable enemies. 

More to the ſame purpoſe he ſaid: You know, my dear, the room he had given me to recriminate upon him, in twenty inſtances: I did not ſpare him: But I need not repeat thoſe inſtances to you. Every one of theſe inſtances, I told him, convinced me of hispride,indeed, but not of hismerit.I confeſſed, that I had as much pride as himſelf; altho' I hoped it was of another kind, than that he ſo readily avowed. But that if he had the leaſt mixture inhisof the true pride (a pride worthy of his birth, of his family, and of his fortune), he ſhould rather wiſh, I would preſume to ſay, to promotemine,than either to ſuppreſs, or to regret that I had it: Thathenceit was, that I thought it beneath me to diſown what had been my motives for declining, for ſome days paſt, any converſation with him, or viſit from Mr. Mennell, that might lead to points out of my power to determine upon, until I heard from my uncle Harlowe; whom, I confeſſed, I had cauſed to be ſounded, whether•might be favoured with his intereſt, to obtain for me a reconciliation with my friends, upon terms which I had cauſed to be propoſed to him. 

He knew not, he ſaid, and ſuppoſed muſt not preſume to aſk, what theſe terms were. But he could but too well gueſs at them; and that he was to have been the preliminary ſacrifice. But I muſt allow him to ſay, That as much as he admired the nobleneſs of my ſentiments in general, and in particular thattruepride in me, which I had ſpoken of; he wiſh'd, that he could compliment me with ſuch an uniformity in it, as ſhould have ſet me as much above all ſubmiſſion to minds implacable and unreaſonable (he hoped he might, without offence, ſay that my brother's and ſiſter's were ſuch), as it had above all favour and condeſcenſion to him. 

Dutyandnature,Sir, call upon me to make the ſubmiſſions you ſpeak of: There is a father, there is a mother, there are uncles, in the one caſe, to juſtify and demand thoſe ſubmiſſions—What, pray, Sir, can be pleaded for thecondeſcenſion,as you call it?—Will you ſay, your merits, either with regard tothem,or tomyſelf,may? 

This to be ſaid, after the perſecution of thoſe relations! After what you have ſuffer'd! After what you have made me hope! Let me aſk you, Madam (we talk'd ofpridejuſt now), What ſort of pride muſthisbe, which could diſpenſe with inclination and preference in his lady's part of it?—What muſt be that love— 

Love,Sir! who talks oflove?—Was notmeritthe thing we were talking of?—HaveIever profeſſed; haveIever required ofyouprofeſſions of a paſſion of that nature? But there is no end of theſe debatings; eachſofaultleſs, eachſofull of ſelf— 

I do not think myſelffaultleſs,Madam:—But— 

Butwhat, Sir!—Would you evermore argue with me, as if you were a child?—Seeking palliations, and making promiſes?—Promiſes of what, Sir? Of being in future the man it is a ſhame a gentleman is not?—Of being the man— 

Good God! interrupted he, with eyes lifted up, ifthouwert to be thus ſevere— 

Well, well, Sir, impatiently—I need only to obſerve, that all this vaſt difference in ſentiments ſhews how unpair'd our minds are—So let us— 

Let uswhat,Madam!—My ſoul is riſing into tumults! And he look'd ſo wildly, that it ſtartled me a good deal—Let uswhat,Madam— 

Why, Sir, let us reſolve to quit every regard for each other—[Nay, flame not out—I am a poor weak-minded creature in ſome things: But where what Iſhould be,or not deſerve to live, if Iam not,is in the queſtion, I have great and invincible ſpirit, or my own conceit betrays me].—Let us reſolve to quit every regard for each other that is more than civil.Thisyou may depend upon; you may, if it will fewel your pride, gratify it with this aſſurance; That I will never marry any other man. I have ſeen enough of your ſex; at leaſt ofyou.—A ſingle life ſhall ever bemychoice—While I will leave you at liberty to purſueyour own. 

Indifference, worſe than indifference! ſaid he, in a paſſion— 

Interrupting him—Indifference let it be—You have not, inmyopinion, at leaſt, deſerved it ſhould be other: If you have inyour own,you have cauſe, at leaſt yourpridehas, to hate me for misjudging you.— 

Deareſt, deareſt creature! ſnatching my hand with wildneſs, let me beſeech you to beuniformlynoble!Civil regards,Madam!—Civil regards!—Can you ſo expect to narrow and confine ſuch a paſſion as mine!— 

Such a paſſion as yours, Mr. Lovelace,deſervesto be narrow'd and confin'd.—It is either the paſſionyoudo not think it; orIdo not.—I queſtion whether your mind is capable of beingſonarrow'd andſowiden'd, as is neceſſary to make it be what I wiſhit to be. Lift up your hands and your eyes, Sir, in that emphatical ſilent wonder, as you pleaſe: But what does it expreſs, what does it convince me of; but that we are not born for one another? 

By his ſoul, he ſaid, and graſp'd my hand with an eagerneſs that hurt it, wewereborn for one another: Imuſtbe his—Iſhouldbe his (and put his other arm round me), altho' his damnation were to be the purchaſe!— 

I was terrify'd!—Let me leave you—or begone from me, Sir—Is the paſſion you boaſt, to be thus ſhockingly declared! 

You muſt not go, Madam!—You muſtnotleave me in anger— 

I will return—I will return—When you can be leſs violent—leſs ſhocking. 

And he let me go. 

The man quite frighted me; inſomuch that when I got into my chamber, I found a ſudden flow of tears a great relief to me. 

In half an hour, he ſent a little billet, expreſſing his concern for the vehemence of his behaviour, and praying to ſee me. 

I went—Becauſe I could not help myſelf, I went. 

He was full of his excuſes.—O my dear, what would you, evenyou,do with ſuch a man as this; and in my ſituation? 

It was very poſſible for him now, he ſaid, to account for the workings of a frenzical diſorder. For his part, he was near diſtraction. All laſt week to ſuffer as he had ſuffer'd; and now to talk ofcivil regardsonly, when he had hoped from the nobleneſs of my mind— 

Hope what you will, interrupted I; I muſt inſiſt upon it, that our minds are by no means ſuited to each other. You have brought me into difficulties. I am deſerted of every friend but Miſs Howe. Mytrue ſentiments I will not conceal: It is againſt my will, that I muſt ſubmit to owe protection from a brother's projects, which Miſs Howe thinks are not given over, to you, who have brought me into theſe ſtreights;notwith my own concurrence brought me into them; remember that— 

I do remember that, Madam! So often reminded, how can I forget it? 

Yet Iwillowe to you this protection, if it be neceſſary, in the earneſt hope, that you willſhunrather thanſeekmiſchief, if any further inquiry after me be made. But what hinders you from leaving me?—Cannot I ſend to you? The Widow Fretchville, it is plain, knows not her own mind: The people here indeed are civiller every day than other: But I had rather have lodgings more agreeable to my circumſtances. I beſt know what will ſuit them; and am reſolved not to be obliged to any body. If you leave me, I will take a civil leave of theſe people, and retire to ſome one of the neighbouring villages, and there, ſecreting myſelf, wait my couſin Morden's arrival with patience. 

He preſumed, he told me, from what I ſaid, that my application to my relations was unſucceſsful: That therefore he hoped I would give him leave now to mention the terms in the nature of ſettlements, which he had long intended to propoſe to me; and which having till now delay'd to do, thro' accidents not proceeding from himſelf, he had thoughts of urging to me the moment I enter'd upon my new houſe; and upon finding myſelf as independent inappearanceas I was infact.Permit me, Madam, to propoſe theſe matters to you:—Not with an expectation of your immediate anſwer; but for your conſideration. 

Were not heſitation, a ſelf-felt glow, a downcaſt eye, more than enough? Your advice was too much in my head: I heſitated. 

He urg'd on upon my ſilence: He would call God to witneſs to the juſtice, nay to thegeneroſityof his intentions to me, if I would be ſo good as to hear what he had to propoſe to me, as to ſettlements. 

Could not the man have fallen into the ſubject without thisparade?Many a point, you know,isrefuſed, andought to berefuſed, if leave be aſked to introduce it; and when once refuſed, the refuſal muſt in honour be adhered to:—Whereas, had it beenſlidin upon one, as I may ſay, it might have merited further conſideration. If ſuch a man as he knows not this, who ſhould? 

I thought myſelf obliged, tho' not to depart from this ſubject intirely, yet, to give it a more diffuſe turn; in order, on the one hand, to ſave myſelf the mortification of appearing too ready in my compliance, after ſuch a diſtance as had been between us; and on the other, to avoid (in purſuance of your advice) the neceſſity of giving him ſuch a repulſe, as might again throw us out of the courſe. 

A cruel alternative to be reduced to! 

You talk ofgeneroſity,Mr. Lovelace, ſaid I; and you talk ofjuſtice; perhaps without having conſider'd the force of the words, in the ſenſe you uſe them on this occaſion.—Let me tell you whatgeneroſityis, in my ſenſe of the word—TRUE GENEROSITY is not confined to pecuniary inſtances: It ismorethan politeneſs: It ismorethan good faith: It ismorethan honour: It ismorethanjuſtice:Since all theſe are but duties, and what a worthy mind cannot diſpenſe with. But TRUE GENEROSITY is greatneſs of ſoul: It incites us to do more by a fellow-creature, than can be ſtrictly required of us: It obliges us to haſten to the relief of an object that wants relief; anticipating even hope or expectation. Generoſity, Sir, will not ſurely permit a worthy mind to doubt of its honourable and beneficent intentions: Much leſs will it allow itſelf to ſhock, to offend any one; and, leaſt of all, a perſonthrown by adverſity, miſhap, or accident, into its protection. 

What an opportunity had he to clear his intentions, had he been ſo diſpoſed, from thelatter partof this home obſervation!—But he run away with thefirſt,and kept to that. 

Admirably defin'd! he ſaid.—But who at this rate, Madam, can be ſaid to begenerousto you?—YourgeneroſityI implore; while,juſtice,as it muſt be my ſole merit, ſhall be my aim. Never was there a woman of ſuch nice and delicate ſentiments! 

It is a reflection upon yourſelf, Sir, and upon the company you have kept, if you think theſe notions either nice or delicate. Thouſands of my ſex are more nice than I; for they would have avoided the devious path I have been ſurprized into: The conſequences of which ſurprize have laid me under the ſad neceſſity of telling a man, who has not delicacy enough to enter into thoſe parts of the female character, which are its glory and diſtinction, what True Generoſity is. 

His divine monitreſs, he called me!—He would endeavour to form his manners, as he had often promiſed, by my example. But he hoped I would now permit him to mention briefly thejuſticehe propoſed to do me, in the terms of the ſettlement; a ſubject ſo proper, before now, to have been enter'd upon; and which would have been enter'd upon long ago, had not my frequent diſpleaſure taken from him the opportunity he had often wiſh'd for: But now having ventur'd to lay hold of this, nothing ſhould divert him from improving it. 

I have no ſpirits juſt now, Sir, to attend to ſuch weighty points. What you have a mind to propoſe, write to me: And I ſhall know what anſwer to return. Only one thing let me remind you of, that if you touch upon any ſubject, in which my papa hasa concern, I ſhall judge by your treatment of the father, what value you have for the daughter. 

Helooked,as if he would chooſe rather to ſpeak than write: But had heſaidſo, I had a ſevere return to have made upon him; as poſſibly he might ſee bymylooks. 

IN this way are we now: A ſort of calm, as I ſaid, ſucceeding a ſtorm:—What may happen next, whether a ſtorm or a calm, with ſuch a ſpirit as I have to deal with, who can tell? 

But be that as it will, I think, my dear, I am notmeanlyoff: And that is a great point with me; and which I know you'll be glad to hear: If it were only, that I can ſee this man without loſing any of that dignity (what other word can I uſe, ſpeaking ofmyſelf,that betokensdecency,and notarrogance?) which is ſo neceſſary to enable me to lookup,or rather, with themind'seye, I may ſay, to lookdownupon a man of this man's caſt. 

Altho' circumſtances have ſo offer'd, that I could not take your advice as to themannerof dealing with him; yet you gave me ſo much courage by it, as has enabled me to conduct things to this iſſue; as well as determin'd me againſt leaving him: Whichbefore,I was thinking to do, at all adventures. Whether, when it came to the point, Iſhouldhave done ſo, or not, I cannot ſay, becauſe it would have depended upon his behaviour at the time. 

But let his behaviour be what it will, I am afraid, with you, that, ſhould any thing offer, at laſt, to oblige me to leave him, I ſhall not mend my ſituation in the world's eye; but the contrary. And yet I will not be treated by him with indignity, while I have any power to help myſelf. 

You, my dear, have accuſed me of havingmodeſty'd-away,as you phraſe it, ſeveral opportunities of being—Being what, my dear?—Why, the wife of a libertine:And what a libertine and his wife are, my couſin Morden's letter tells us.—Let me here, once for all, endeavour to account for the motives of my behaviour to this man, and for the principles I have proceeded upon, as they appear to me upon a cloſe ſelf-examination. 

Be pleaſed then to allow me to think, that my motives on this occaſion, ariſe notaltogetherfrom maidenly niceneſs; nor yet from the apprehenſion of what my preſent tormentor, and future huſband, may think of a precipitate compliance, on ſuch a diſagreeable behaviour as his: But they ariſe principally from what offers to my own heart, reſpecting, as I may ſay, its own rectitude, its own judgment of thefitand theunfit; as I would, without ſtudy, anſwerformyſelftomyſelf, in thefirſtplace; tohim,and to theworld,in theſecondonly. Principles, thatarein my mind; that Ifoundthere; implanted, no doubt, by the firſt gracious Planter: Which thereforeimpellme, as I may ſay, to act up to them, that thereby I may, to the beſt of my judgment, be enabled to comport myſelf worthily in both ſtates (the ſingle and the married), let others act as they will byme. 

I hope, my dear, I do not deceive myſelf, and, inſtead of ſetting about rectifying what is amiſs in my heart, endeavour to find excuſes for habits and peculiarities, which I am unwilling to caſt off or overcome. The heart is very deceitful: Do you, my dear friend, lay mine open (but, ſurely, it is always open before you!) and ſpare me not, if you find or think it culpable. 

This obſervation, once for all, as I ſaid, I thought proper to make, to convince you, that, to the beſt of my judgment, my errors, in matters as well of the leſſer moment, as the greater, ſhall rather be the fault of my underſtanding than of my will. 

I am, my deareſt friend, 

Your ever-obligedCLARISSA HARLOWE.LETTER XIII. MiſsCLARISSA HARLOWE,To MiſsHOWE.
Tueſday Night, May16.MR. Lovelace has ſent me, by Dorcas, his propoſals, as follow: 

'To ſpare a delicacy ſo extreme, and to obey you, I write: And the rather, that you may communicate this paper to Miſs Howe, who may conſult any of her friends you ſhall think proper to have intruſted on this occaſion. I ſay,intruſted; becauſe, as you know, I have given it out to ſeveral perſons, that we are actually marry'd.' 

'In the firſt place, Madam, I offer to ſettle upon you, by way of jointure, your whole eſtate. And moreover to veſt in truſtees ſuch a part of mine in Lancaſhire, as ſhall produce a clear four hundred pounds a year, to be paid to your ſole and ſeparate uſe, quarterly.' 

'My own eſtate is a clear 2000l. per annum.Lord M. propoſes to give me poſſeſſion either of That which he has in Lancaſhire (to which, by the way, I think I have a better title than he has himſelf), or That we callThe Lawnin Hertfordſhire, upon my nuptials with a lady whom he ſo greatly admires; and to make that I ſhall chooſe a clear 1000l. per annum.' 

'My too great contempt of cenſure has ſubjected me to much traduction. It may not therefore be improper to aſſure you, on the word of a gentleman, that no part of my eſtate was ever mortgaged: And that altho' I lived very expenſively abroad, and made large draughts, yet, that Midſummer-Day next will diſcharge all that I owe in the world. My notions are not all bad ones. I have been thought, in pecuniary caſes,generous.It would have deſervedanothername, had I not firſt beenjuſt.' 

'If, as your own eſtate is at preſent in your father's hands, you rather chooſe that I ſhould make a jointure out of mine, tantamount to yours, be it what it will, it ſhall be done. I will engage Lord M. to write toyou,what he propoſes to do on the happy occaſion: Not as your deſire or expectation, but to demonſtrate, that no advantage is intended to be taken of the ſituation you are in with your own family.' 

'To ſhew the beloved daughter the conſideration I have for her, I will conſent, that ſhe ſhall preſcribe the terms of agreement in relation to the large ſums, which muſt be in her father's hands, ariſing from her grandfather's eſtate. I have no doubt, but he will be put upon making large demands upon you. All thoſe it ſhall be in your power to comply with, for the ſake of your own peace. And the remainder ſhall be paid into your hands, and be intirely at your diſpoſal, as a fund to ſupport thoſe charitable donations, which I have heard you ſo famed foroutof your family; and for which you have been ſo greatly reflected uponinit.' 

'As to cloaths, jewels, and the like, againſt the time you ſhall chooſe to make your appearance, it will be my pride, that you ſhall not be beholden for ſuch of theſe, as ſhall be anſwerable to the rank of both, to thoſe who have had the ſtupid folly to renounce a daughter they deſerved not. You muſt excuſe me, Madam: You would miſtruſt my ſincerity in the reſt, could I ſpeak of theſe people with leſs aſperity, tho' ſo nearly related to you.' 

'Theſe, Madam, are my propoſals. They are ſuch as I always deſigned to make, whenever you would permit me to enter into the delightful ſubject. But you have been ſo determin'd to try every method for reconciling yourſelf to your relations even by giving me abſolutely up for ever, that yo•have ſeem'd to think it but juſtice to keep me at•diſtance, till the event of that yourpredominanthope could be ſeen. It isnowſeen!—And altho' Ihave been,and perhaps ſtillam,ready to regret the want of that preference I wiſh'd for from you as Miſs Clariſſa Harlowe; yet I am ſure, as the huſband of Mrs. Lovelace, I ſhall be more ready to adore than to blame you for the pangs you have given to a heart, the generoſity, or ratherjuſticeof which, my implacable enemies have taught you to doubt: And this ſtill the readier, as I am perſuaded, that thoſe pangs never would have been given by a mind ſo noble, had not the doubt been entertained, perhaps, with too great an appearance of reaſon; and as I hope I ſhall have it to reflect, that the moment the doubt ſhall be overcome, the indifference will ceaſe.' 

'I will only add, that if I have omitted any thing, that would have given you further ſatisfaction; or if the above terms be ſhort of what you would wiſh; you will be pleaſed to ſupply them as you think fit. And when I know your pleaſure, I will inſtantly order articles to be drawn up conformably; that nothing in my power may be wanting to make you happy.' 

'You will now, deareſt Madam, judge, how far all the reſt depends upon yourſelf.' 

YOU ſee, my dear, what he offers. You ſee it is all my fault, that he has not made theſe offers before.—I am a ſtrange creature! To be to blame in everything, and to every-body! Yet neither intend the ill at the time, nor know it tobethe ill till too late, or ſo nearly too late, that I muſt give up all the delicacy he talks of, to compound for my fault! 

I ſhall now judge how far all the reſt depends upon myſelf!So coldly concludes he ſuch warm, and, in the main, unobjectible propoſals! Would you not, as you read, have ſuppoſed, that the paper would conclude with the moſt earneſt demand of a day?—Iown, I had that expectation ſo ſtrong, reſultingnaturally,as I may ſay, from the premiſes, that without ſtudying for diſſatisfaction, I could not help being diſſatisfied, when I came to the concluſion.—But you ſay, there is no help. I muſt, perhaps, makefurtherſacrifices. All delicacy, it ſeems, is to be at an end with me! But if ſo, this man knows not what everywiſeman knows, that prudence, and virtue, and delicacy of mind in awife,do the huſband morerealhonour, in the eye of the world, than the ſame qualities (wereſhedeſtitute of them) inhimſelf:As thewantof them in her does him morediſ-honour: For are not the wife's errors, the huſband's reproach? Howjuſtlyhis reproach, is another thing. 

I will conſider this paper; and write to it, if I am able: For it ſeemsnow, all the reſt depends upon myſelf. 

LETTER XIV. MiſsCLARISSA HARLOWE,To MiſsHOWE.
Wedneſday Morning, May17.MR. Lovelace would fain have engag'd me laſt night. But as I was not prepar'd to enter upon the ſubject of his propoſals, intending to conſider them maturely, and was not highly pleaſed with his concluſion (and then there is hardly any getting from him in tolerable time over-night), I deſired to be excuſed ſeeing him till morning. 

About ſeven o'clock we met in the dining-room. I find, he was full of expectation that I ſhould meet him with a very favourable, who knows, but with athankfulaſpect?—And I immediately found by his ſullen countenance, that he was under no ſmall diſapp•intment that I did not. 

My deareſt love, are you well?—Why look you ſo ſolemn upon me?—Will your indifference neverbe over?—If I have propoſed terms in any reſpectſhortof your expectation— 

I told him, that he had very conſiderately mention'd my ſhewing his propoſals to Miſs Howe, and conſulting any of her friends upon them by her means; and I ſhould have an opportunity to ſend them to her, by Collins, by-and-by; and ſo inſiſted to ſuſpend any talk upon that ſubject till I had her opinion upon them. 

Good God!—If there were but the leaſt loop-hole; the leaſt room for delay!—But he was writing a letter to his uncle, to give him an account of his ſituation with me, and could not finiſh it ſo ſatisfactorily, either to my Lord, or to himſelf, as if I would condeſcend to ſay, whether the terms he had propoſed were acceptable, or not. 

Thus far, I told him, I could ſay, That my principal point was peace and reconciliation with my family. As to other matters, the genteelneſs of his own ſpirit would put him upon doing more for me than I ſhould aſk, or expect. Wherefore, if all he had to write about was to know what Lord M. would do on my account, he might ſpare himſelf the trouble; for that my utmoſt wiſhes as to myſelf, were much more eaſily gratify'd than he perhaps imagin'd. 

He aſked me then, If I would ſo far permit him to touch upon the happy day, as to requeſt his uncle's preſence on the occaſion, and to be my father? 

Fatherhad a ſweet and venerable ſound with it, I ſaid. I ſhould be glad to have a father who would own me! 

Was not this plain ſpeaking, think you, my dear? Yet it rather, I muſt own, appears ſo to me on reflection, than wasdeſignedfreely at the time. For I then, with a ſigh from the bottom of my heart, thought of myown father; bitterly regretting, that I am an outcaſt from him and from my mother. 

Mr. Lovelace, I thought, ſeemed a little affected; atthemannerof my ſpeaking, as well as at the ſad reflection, I ſuppoſe. 

I am but a very young creature, Mr. Lovelace, ſaid I, and wiped my averted eye, altho' you havekindly,and inlove to me,introduced ſo much ſorrow to me already: So you muſt not wonder, that the wordfatherſtrikes ſo ſenſibly upon the heart of a child, ever dutiful till ſhe knew you, and whoſe tender years ſtill require the paternal wing. 

He turned towards the window: [Rejoice with me, my dear, ſince I ſeem devoted to him, that the man is not abſolutely impenetrable!]—His emotion was viſible; yet he endeavoured to ſuppreſs it—Approaching me again; again he was obliged to turn from me; Angelic ſomething, he ſaid: But then, obtaining a heart moreſuitableto his wiſh, he once more approached me.—For his own part, he ſaid, as Lord M. was ſo ſubject to the gout, he was afraid, that the compliment he had juſt propoſed to make him, might, if made, occaſion a longer ſuſpenſion, than he could bear to think of: And if it did, it would vex him to the heart, that he had made it. 

I could not ſay a ſingle word to this, you know, my dear. But you will gueſs at my thoughts of what h•ſaid—So much paſſionate love,lip-deep!So prudent and ſo dutifully patientat heartto a relation he had till now, ſo undutifully deſpiſed!—Why, why, a•I thrown upon ſuch a man! thought I.— 

He heſitated, as if contending with himſelf, an after taking a turn or two about the room,—He w•at a great loſs what to determine upon, he ſaid, becauſe he had not the honour of knowing when he w•to be made the happieſt of men:—Would to God might that very inſtant be reſolved upon! 

He ſtopp'd a moment or two, ſtaring in my dow•caſt face [Did I not, O my beloved friend, thi•you, want a father or a mother juſt then?] But he could not, ſoſoonas he wiſhed, procure my co•ſentto a day; inthatcaſe, he thought the compliment mightas wellbe made to Lord M. asnot:—Since the ſettlements might be drawn and ingroſſed in the intervenient time, which would pacify his impatience, as no time would be loſt. 

You will ſuppoſe howIwas affected by this ſpeech, by repeating the ſubſtance of whatheſaid upon it; as follows. 

—But by his ſoul, he knew not, ſo much was I upon the reſerve, and ſo much latent meaning did my eye import, whether, when he moſt hoped to pleaſe me, he was not fartheſt from doing ſo. Would I vouchſafe to ſay, Whether I approved of his compliment to Lord M. or not? 

Miſs Howe, thought I, at that moment, ſays, I muſtnotrun away from This man! 

To be ſure, Mr. Lovelace, if this matter isever to be,it muſt be agreeable to me to have the full approbation ofoneſide, ſince I cannot have that of theother. 

If this matter be ever to be!Good God! what words were thoſe at this time of day! And fullapprobationof one ſide! Why that wordapprobation?When the greateſt pride of all his family was, That of having the honour of ſo dear a creature for their relation? Would to Heaven, my deareſt life, added he, that, without complimentingAny-body, to-morrow might be the happieſt day of my life!—What ſay you, my angel? With a trembling impatience, thatſeemednot affected,—What ſay you forto-morrow? 

It was likely, my dear, I could ſay much to it, or name another day, had I been diſpoſed to the latter, with ſuch an hinted delay from him. 

Nextday, Madam, if notto-morrow!—Or theday after that!—And taking my two hands, ſtared me into a half-confuſion. 

No, no! You cannot think all of a ſudden, thereſhould be reaſon for ſuch a hurry. It will be moſt agreeable, to be ſure, for my Lord to be preſent. 

I am all obedience and reſignation, returned the wretch, with a ſelf-pluming air, as if he had acquieſced to a propoſal made by me, and had complimented me with a great piece of ſelf-denial. 

Modeſty, I think, required it of me, that it ſhould paſs ſo: Did it not?—I think it did. Would to Heaven—But what ſignifies wiſhing? 

But when he would haverewarded himſelf,as he had heretofore called it, for this ſelf-ſuppoſed conceſſion, with a kiſs, I repulſed him with a juſt and very ſincere diſdain. 

He ſeemed both vex'd and ſurpriz'd, as one who had made propoſals that he had expected every thing from. He plainly ſaid, that he thought our ſituation would intitle him to ſuch an innocent freedom: And he was both amaz'd and griev'd to be thus ſcornfully repulſed. 

No reply could be made by me. I abruptly broke from him. I recollect, as I paſſed by one of the pierglaſſes, that I ſaw in it his clenched hand offered in wrath to his forehead: The words,indifference, by his ſoul, next to hatred,I heard him ſpeak: And ſomething oficehe mentioned: I heard not what. 

Whether he intends to write to my Lord, or to Miſs Montague, I cannot tell. But as all delicacy ought to be over with menow,perhaps I am to blame to expect it from a man who may not knowwhat it is.If he doesnot,and yet thinks himſelf very delicate, and intends not to be otherwiſe, I am rather to be pitied, than he to be cenſured. And after all, ſince Imuſttake him as I find him, Imuſt:That is to ſay, as a man ſo vain, and ſo accuſtom'd to be admired, that, not being conſcious of internal defect, he has taken no pains to poliſh more than his outſide: And as his propoſals are higher than my expectations; and as in his own opinion, he has a great deal to bear fromme,Iwill(no new offence preventing) ſit down to anſwer them:—And, if poſſible, in terms as unobjectible to him, as his are to me. 

But after all, ſee you not my dear, more and more, the miſmatch that there is in our minds? 

However, I am willing to compound for my fault, by giving up (if that may be all my puniſhment) the expectation of what is deemed happineſs in this life, with ſuch a huſband as I fear he will make. In ſhort, I will content myſelf to be a ſuffering perſon thro' the ſtate to the end of my life. A long one it cannot be!— 

This may qualify him (as it may prove) from ſtings of conſcience from miſbehaviour to afirſtwife, to be a more tolerable one to aſecond,tho' not perhaps better deſerving: While my ſtory, to all who ſhall know it, will afford theſe inſtructions: That the eye is a traitor, and ought ever to be miſtruſted: That form is deceitful: In other words; That a fine perſon is ſeldom pair'd by a fine mind: And that ſound principles, and a good heart, are the only baſes on which the hopes of ahappy future,either with reſpect to thehereor to thehereafter,can be built. 

And ſo much at preſent for Mr. Lovelace's propoſals: Of which I deſire your opinion. 

I am, my deareſt fri•nd, 

Your ever-obligedCL. HARLOWE.Four letters are written by Mr. Lovelace from the date of his laſt, giving the ſtate of affairs between him and the lady, pretty much the ſame as in hers in the ſame period, allowing for the humour in his; and for his reſentments expreſſed with vehemence on her reſolution to leave him, if her friends could be prevailed upon.—A few extracts from them will be only given. 

'What, ſays he, might have become of me, and my projects, had not her father, and the reſt of theimplacables, ſtood my friends?' After violent threatnings and vows of revenge, he ſays— ''Tis plain ſhe would have given me up for ever; nor ſhould I have been able to prevent her abandoning of me, unleſs I had torn up the tree by the roots to come at the fruit; which I hope ſtill to bring down by a gentle ſhake or two, if I can but have patience to ſtay the ripening ſeaſon.' 

Thus triumphing in his unpolite cruelty, he ſays,—'After her haughty treatment of me, I am reſolved ſhe ſhall ſpeak out. There are a thouſand beauties to be diſcovered in the face, in the accent, in th•buſh-beating heſitations of a woman that is earneſt about a ſubject which ſhe wants to introduce, yet knows not how. Silly rogues, calling themſelves generous ones, would value themſelves for ſparing a lady's confuſion: But they are ſilly rogues indeed▪and rob themſelves of prodigious pleaſure by the•forwardneſs; and at the ſame time deprive her o•diſplaying a world of charms, which only can be manifeſted on theſe occaſions. Hard-heartedneſs, as it is called, is an eſſential of the libertine's character. Familiarized to the diſtreſſes he occaſions, he is ſeldom betray'd by tenderneſs into a complaiſant weakneſs unworthy of himſelf. How have I enjoyed a charming creature's confuſion, as I have ſat over-againſt her; her eyes loſt in admiration of my ſhoebuckles, or meditating ſome uncouth figure in the carpet!' 

Mentioning the ſettlements, he ſays,—'I am in earneſt as to the terms. If I marry her (and I have no doubt but that I ſhall, after my pride, my ambition, myrevenge,if thou wilt, is gratify'd), I will do her noble juſtice. The more I do for ſuch a prudent, ſuch an excellent oeconomiſt, the more ſhall I do for myſelf.—But, by my ſoul, Belford, her haughtineſs ſhall be brought down to own both loveand obligation to me.—Nor will this ſketch of ſettlements bring us forwarder than I would have it. Modeſty of ſex will ſtand my friend at any time. At the very altar, our hands join'd, I'd engage to make this proud beauty leave the parſon and me, and all my friends preſent, tho' there were twenty of them, to look like fools upon one another, while ſhe took wing, and flew out of the church-door, or window, if that were open, and the door ſhut; and this only by a very word.' 

He mentions his raſh expreſſion, that ſhe ſhould be his, altho' damnation were to be the purchaſe; and owns that, at that inſtant, he was upon the point of making a violent attempt; but that he was check'd in the very moment, and but juſt in time, by the awe he was ſtruck with on again caſting his eye upon her terrified but lovely face, and ſeeing, as he thought, her ſpotleſs heart in every line of it. 

'O virtue, virtue! ſays he, what is there in thee, that can thus affect the heart of ſuch a man as me, againſt my will!—Whence theſe involuntary tremors, and fear of giving mortal offence?—What art thou, that acting in the breaſt of a feeble woman, canſt ſtrike ſo much awe into a ſpirit ſo intrepid! Which never before, no, not in my firſt attempt, young as I then was, and frighted at my own boldneſs (till I found myſelfforgiven), had ſuch an effect upon me!' 

He paints, in lively colours, that part of the ſcene•tween him and the Lady, where ſhe ſays,'The wordfatherhas a ſweet and venerable found with it.' 

'I was exceedingly affected, ſays he, upon the occaſion. But was aſhamed to be ſurpriſed by her into ſuch a fit of unmanly weakneſs:—So aſhamed, that I was reſolved to ſubdue it at the inſtant, and guard againſt the like for the future. Yet, at thatmoment, I more than half regretted, that I could not permit her to enjoy a triumph which ſhe ſo well deſerved to glory in:—Her youth, her beauty, her artleſs innocence, and her manner, equally beyond compariſon or deſcription. But herindiffe•ence,Belford!—That ſhe could reſolve to ſacrifice me to the malice of my enemies; and carry on the deſig•in ſo clandeſtine a manner—Yet love her, as I do to frenzy!—Revere her, as I do, to adoration!—Theſe were the recollections with which I fortify'd my recreant heart againſt her.—Yet, after all, if ſhe perſevere, ſhe muſt conquer!—Coward, as ſhe has made me, that never was a coward before!' 

HE concludes his fourth letter in a vehement rage, upon her repulſing him, when he offer'd to ſalute her; having ſuppoſed, as he owns, that ſhe would have bee•all condeſcenſion on his propoſals to her. 

'This,ſays he,I will for ever remember againſt her, in order to ſteel my own heart, that I may c•thro' a rock of ice to hers; and repay her for th•diſdain, the ſcorn, which glow'd in her countenance, and was apparent in her air, at her abrup•departure from me, after ſuch obliging behaviour on my ſide, and after I had ſo earneſtly preſſed h•for an early day.—The women below ſay, Sh•hates me, ſhe deſpiſes me!—And 'tis true: Sh•does; ſhe muſt.—And why cannot I take their advice?—I will not long, my fair one, be deſpiſed by thee, and laughed at by them!' 

'Let me acquaint thee, Jack, adds he, by way of poſtſcript, That this effort of hers to leave me if ſhe could have been received; her ſending for a coach on Sunday; no doubt, reſolving not to return, if ſhe had gone out without me (for did ſhe not declare, that ſhe had thought to retire to ſome of the villages about town where ſhe could be ſafe and private?); have al•together ſo much alarm'd me, that I have been adding to the written inſtructions for my ſervant, and the people below, how to act, in caſe ſhe ſhould elope in my abſence: Particularly letting my fellow know what he ſhall report to ſtrangers, in caſe ſhe ſhall throw herſelf upon any ſuch, with a reſolution to abandon me. Theſe inſtructions I ſhall further add to, as circumſtances offer.' 

LETTER XV. MiſsHOWE,To MiſsCLARISSA HARLOWE.
Thurſday, May18.I Have neither time nor patience, my dear friend, to anſwer to every material article in your laſt let•ers, juſt now received. Mr. Lovelace's propoſals•e all I like of him. And yet (as you do) I think,•hat he concludes them not with that warmth and•arneſtneſs which we might naturally have expected•om him. Never in my life did I hear or read of ſo•atient a man, with ſuch a bleſſing in his reach. But•retches of his caſt, between you and me, my dear,•ave not, I fancy, the ardors that honeſt men have. Who knows, as your Bell once ſpitefully ſaid, but he may have half a dozen creatures to quit his hands of, before he engages for life?—Yet I believe you muſt not expect him to be honeſt on this ſide of his grand•macteric. 

He,to ſuggeſt delay from a compliment to be made to Lord M. and to give time for ſettlements!—He,a part of whoſe character it is, not to know what complaiſance to his relations is!—I have no patience with him!—You did indeed want an interpoſing••iend, on the affecting occaſion which you mention•n yours of yeſterday morning. But, upon my word, were I to have been that moment in your•••u•tion, and been ſo treated, I would have torn hiseyes out, and left it to his own heart, when I had done, to furniſh the reaſon for it. 

Would to Heaven to-morrow, without complimenting any-body, might be his happy day!—Villain! After he had himſelf ſuggeſted the compliment!—And I think he accuſes YOU of delaying!—Fellow, that he is!—How my heart is wrung— 

But, as matters now ſtand betwixt you, I am very unſeaſonable in expreſſing my reſentments againſt him.—Yet I don't know whether I am or not, neither; ſince it is the cruelleſt of fates, for a woman to be forced to have a man whom her heart deſpiſes You muſt, atleaſt,deſpiſe him; at times, however. His clenched fiſt offered to his forehead on your leaving him in juſt diſpleaſure; I wiſh it had been a poleax, and in the hand of his worſt enemy. 

I will endeavour to think of ſome method, of ſome ſcheme, to get you from him, and to fix you ſafel•ſomewhere, till your couſin Morden arrives: A ſcheme to lie by you, and to be purſued as occaſio•may be given. You are ſure, that you can go abroa•when you pleaſe; and that our correſpondence is ſafe I cannot, however, for the reaſons heretofore mentioned, reſpecting your own reputation, wiſh you〈◊〉leave him, while he gives you not cauſe to ſuſpec•his honour. But your heart, I know, would be th•eaſier, if you were ſure of ſome aſylum, in caſe of neceſſity. 

Yet once more, I ſay, I can have no notion th•he can or dare to mean you diſhonour.—But then th•man is a fool, my dear—that's all. 

However, ſince you are thrown upon a fool, ma•the fool, at the firſt opportunity; and tho' I do•that this man will be the moſt ungovernable of foo•as all witty and vain fools are, take him as a puniſhment, ſince you cannot as a reward. In ſhort, as o•given, to convince you, that there is nothing but i•perfection in this life. 

I ſhall be impatient till I have your next. I am, my deareſt friend, 

Your ever-affectionate and faithfulANNA HOWE.LETTER XVI. Mr.BELFORD,ToROBERT LOVELACE,Eſq
Wedneſday, May17.I Would conceal nothing from you that relates to yourſelf ſo much as the incloſed. You will ſee what the noble writer apprehends from you, and wiſhes of you, with regard to Miſs Harlowe, and how much at heart all your relations have it, that you do honourably by her. They compliment me with an influence over you, which I wiſh with all my ſoul you would let me have in this article. 

Let me once more intreat thee, Lovelace, to reflect, before it be too late, before the mortal offence•e given, upon the graces and merits of this lady. Let thy frequent remorſes at laſt end in one effectual one. Let not pride and wantonneſs of heart, ruin thy fairer proſpects. By my faith, Lovelace, there is nothing•ut vanity, conceit, and nonſenſe, in our wild ſchemes. As we grow older, we ſhall be wiſer, and looking back upon our fooliſh notions of the preſent hour, ſhall certainly deſpiſe ourſelves (our youth diſſipated), when we think of the honourable engagements we might have made. Thou, more eſpecially, if thou letteſt ſuch a matchleſs creature ſlide thro' thy fingers. A creature pure from her cradle. In all her actions and ſentiments uniformly noble. Strict in the performance of all her evenunrewardedduties to the moſt unreaſonable of fathers, what a wife will ſhe make the man who ſhall have the honour to call her his! 

Reflect likewiſe upon her ſufferings for thee. Actuallyat the time thou art forming ſchemes to ruin her (at leaſt, inherſenſe of the word) is ſhe not labouring under a father's curſe laid upon her by thy means, and for thy ſake? And wouldſt thou give operation and completion to this curſe? 

And what, Lovelace, all the time is thy pride? Thou that vainly imagineſt, that the whole family of the, Harlowes, and that of the Howes too, are but thy machines, unknown to themſelves, to bring about thy purpoſes, and thy revenge: What art thou more, or better, than the inſtrument even of her implacable brother, and envious ſiſter, to perpetrate the diſgrace of the moſt excellent of ſiſters, which they are moved to by vilely low and ſordid motives?—Canſt thou bear, Lovelace, to be thought the machine of thy inveterate enemy James Harlowe?—Nay, art thou not the cully of that ſtill viler Joſeph Leman, who ſerves himſelf as much by thy money, as he does thee by the double part he acts by thy direction?—And the devil's agent beſides, who only can, and who certainly will, ſuitably reward thee, if thou proceedeſt, and if thou effecteſt thy wicked purpoſe? 

Could any man but you put together upon paper the following queſtions, with ſo much unconcern as you ſeem to have written them?—Give them a reperuſal, O heart of adamant!'Whither can ſhe fly to avoid me? Her parents will not receive her; her uncles will not entertain her: Her beloved Norton is in their direction, and cannot. Miſs Howe dare not. She has not one friend in town but ME: Is intirely a ſtranger to the townSee Letterii.p.17..'—What muſt that heart be that can triumph in a diſtreſs ſo deep, into which ſhe has been plunged by thy elaborate arts and contrivances? And what a ſweet, yet ſad reflection was that, which had almoſt had its due effect upon thee, ariſing from thy naming Lord M. for her nuptial father! Her tender years incliningher towiſha father, and tohopea friend.—O my dear Lovelace, canſt thou reſolve to be, inſtead of the father thou haſt robbed her of, a devil? 

Thou knoweſt, that I have no intereſt, that I can have no view, in wiſhing thee to do juſtice to this admirable creature. For thy own ſake, once more I conjure thee, for thy family's ſake, and for the ſake of our common humanity, let me beſeech thee to be juſt to Miſs Clariſſa Harlowe. 

No matter whether theſe expoſtulations are in character from me, or not. Ihavebeen, andam,bad enough. If thou takeſt my advice, which is, as the incloſed will ſhew thee, the advice of all thy family, thou wilt perhaps have it to reproach me (and but perhaps neither), that thou art not a worſe man than myſelf. But if thou doſtnot,and if thou ruineſt ſuch a virtue, all the complicated wickedneſs of ten devils, let looſe among the innocent, with full power over them, will not do ſo much vile and baſe miſchief as thou wilt be guilty of. 

It is ſaid, that the prince on his throne is not ſafe, if a mind ſo deſperate can be found, as values not itsownlife. So may it be ſaid, that the moſt immaculate virtue is not ſafe, if a man can be met with, who has no regard to his own honour, and makes a jeſt of the moſt ſolemn vows and proteſtations. 

Thou mayeſt by trick, chicane, and falſe colours, thou who art worſe than a pickeroon in love, overcome a poor lady ſo intangled as thou haſt intangled her; ſo unprotected as thou haſt made her: But conſider, how much more generous and juſt to her, and noble to thyſelf, it is, to overcomethyſelf. 

Once more, it is no matter, whether my paſt or future actions countenance my preachment, as perhaps thou'lt call what I have written: But this I promiſe thee, that whenever I meet with a woman of but one half of Miſs Harlowe's perfections, who will favour me with her acceptance, I will take the adviceI give, and marry. Nor will I attempt to try her honour at the hazard of my own. In other words, I will not degrade an excellent creature in her own eyes, by trials, when I have no cauſe for ſuſpicion. And let me add, with reſpect, to thyEagleſhip's manifeſtation, of which thou boaſteſt, in thy attempts upon the innocent and uncorrupted, rather than upon thoſe whom thou humourouſly compareſt to wrens,philtits,and wagtailsVol.III.p.352., that I hope I have it not once to reproach myſelf, that I ruin'd the morals of any one creature, who otherwiſe would have been uncorrupted. Guilt enough in contributing to thecontinuedguilt of other poor wretches, if I am one of thoſe who take care ſhe ſhall never riſe again, when ſhe has once fallen. 

Whatever the capital devil, under whoſe banner thou haſt liſted, will let thee do, with regard to this incomparable woman, I hope thou wilt act with honour, in relation to the incloſed, between Lord M. and me; who, as thou wilt ſee, deſires, that thou mayeſt not know he wrote on the ſubject; for reaſons, I think, very far from being creditable to thyſelf: And that thou wilt take as meant, the honeſt zeal for thy ſervice, of 

Thy real friend,J. BELFORD,LETTER XVII. LordM.ToJOHN BELFORD,Eſq
[Incloſed in the preceding]. 

M. Hall,Monday May15.SIR,IF any man in the world has power over my nephew, it is you. I therefore write this, to beg you to interfere in the affair depending between him and the moſt accompliſhed of women, as every one ſays; andwhat every one ſays, muſt be true. 

I don't know that he has any bad deſigns upon her; but I know his temper too well, not to be apprehenſive upon ſuch long delays: And the ladies here have been for ſome time in fear for her; my ſiſter Sadleir, in particular, who (you know) is a wiſe woman, ſays, that theſe delays, in the preſent caſe, muſt be from him, rather than from the lady. He had always indeed a ſtrong antipathy to marriage; and may think of playing his dog's tricks by her, as he has by ſo many others. If there's any danger of this, 'tis beſt to prevent it in time: For,when a thing is done, advice comes too late. 

He has always had the folly and impertinence to make a jeſt of me for uſing proverbs: But as they are the wiſdom of whole nations and ages, collected into a ſmall compaſs, I am not to be ſhamed out of ſentences, that often contain more wiſdom in them, than the tedious harangues of moſt of our parſons and moraliſts. Let him laugh at them, if he pleaſes: You and I know better things, Mr. Belford.—Tho' you have kept company with a wolf, you have not learnt to howl of him. 

But nevertheleſs, you muſt not let him know, that I have written to you on this ſubject. I am aſhamed to ſay it; but he has ever treated me, as if I were a man of very common underſtanding. And would perhaps think never the better of the beſt advice in the world, for coming from me. 

I am ſure, he has no reaſon to ſlight me as he does. He may and will be the better for me, if he outlives me; tho' he once told me to my face, That I might do as I would with my eſtate; for that he, for his part, loved his liberty as much as he deſpiſed money. He thought, I ſuppoſe, thatI could not cover him with my wings, without pecking at him with my bill; tho' I never uſed to be pecking at him, without very great occaſion: And, God knows, he might have my very heart, if he would but endeavour to oblige me, byſtudying his own good; for that is all I deſire of him. Indeed, it was his poor mother that firſt ſpoil'd him; and I have been but too indulgent to him ſince.—A fine grateful diſpoſition, you'll ſay, toreturn evil for good!But that was always his way. 

This match, however, as the lady has ſuch an extraordinary ſhare of wiſdom and goodneſs, might ſet all to rights: and if you can forward it, I would enable him to make whatever ſettlements he could wiſh; and ſhould not be unwilling to put him in poſſeſſion of another pretty eſtate beſides: For what do I live for (as I have often ſaid), but to ſee him and my two nieces well married and ſettled? May heaven ſettle him down to a better mind, and turn his heart to more of goodneſs and conſideration! 

If the delays are on his ſide, I tremble for the lady; and, if on hers (as he tells my niece Charlotte), I could wiſh the young lady were apprized, thatDelays are dangerous.Excellent as ſhe is, I can tell her, ſhe ought not to depend on her merits with ſuch a changeable fellow, and ſuch a profeſſed marriage-hater, as he has been. I know you are very good at giving kind hints.A word to the wiſe is enough. 

I wiſh you would try what you can do with him; for I have warned him ſo often of his wicked practices, that I begin to deſpair of my words having any effect upon him. But let him remember, thatVengeance, tho' it comes with leaden feet, ſtrikes with iron hands.If he behaves ill in this caſe, he may find it ſo. What a pity it is, that a man of his talents and learning ſhould be ſo vile a rake! Alas! alas!Une poignée de bonne vie vaut mieux que plein muy de clergé; A handful of good life is better than a whole buſhel of learning. 

You may throw in, too, as his friend, that, ſhould he provoke me, it may not be too late for me to marry. My old friend Wycherly did ſo, when he was older than I am, on purpoſe to plaguehisnephew:And, inſpite of this gout, I might have a child or two ſtill. And have not been without ſome thoughts that way, when he has angered me more than ordinary: But theſe thoughts have gone off again hitherto, upon my conſidering, thatthe children of very young and very old men[tho' I am not ſo very old neither]laſt not long; and thatold men, when they marry young women,are ſaid tomake much of death:Yet who knows but that matrimony might be good againſt the gouty humours I am troubled with? 

The ſentences, that I have purpoſely wove into my diſcourſe, may be of ſome ſervice to you in talking to him; but uſe them ſparingly, that he may not diſcover, that you borrow yourdartsfrom myquiver. 

May your good counſels, Mr. Belford, founded upon the hints I have given, pierce his heart, and incite him to do what will be ſo happy for himſelf, and ſo neceſſary for the honour of that admirable lady whom I long to ſee his wife; and, if I may, I will not think of one for myſelf. 

Should he abuſe the confidence ſhe has plac'd in him, I myſelf ſhall pray, that vengeance may f•ll upon his head.—Raro—Raro—(I quite forget all my Latin! but I think it is)—Raro antecedentem ſceleſtum deſeruit pede poena claudo:Where vice goes before, vengeance (ſooner or later) will follow. 

I ſhall make no apologies to you for this trouble. I know how well you love him and me; and there is nothing in which you could ſerve us both more importantly, than in forwarding this match to the utmoſt of your power. When it is done, how ſhall I rejoice to ſee you at M. Hall! Mean time, I ſhall long to hear, that you are likely to be ſucceſsful; and am, 

Dear Sir,Your moſt faithful friend and ſervant,M.Mr. Lovelace having not returned an anſwer to Mr. Belford's expoſtulatory letter, ſo ſoon as Mr. Belford expected, he wrote to him, expreſſing his apprehenſion, that he had diſobliged him by his honeſt freedom. Among other things, he ſays—'I paſs my time here at Watford, attending my dying uncle, very heavily. I cannot therefore, by any means, diſpenſe with thy correſpondence. And why ſhouldſt thou puniſh me, for having more conſcience and remorſe than thyſelf? Thou, who never thoughteſt either conſcience or remorſe an honour to thee. And I have, beſides, a melancholy ſtory to tell thee, in relation to Belton and his Thomaſine; and which may afford a leſſon to all the keeping claſs.' 

'I have a letter from each of our three companions in the time. They have all the wickedneſs that thou haſt, but not the wit. Some new rogueries do two of them boaſt of, which, I think, it completed, deſerve the gallows.' 

'I am far from hating intrigue upon principle. But to have aukward fellows plot, and commit their plots to paper, deſtitute of the ſeaſonings, of theacumen,which is thy talent, how extremely ſhocking muſt their letters be!—But do thou, Lovelace, whether thou art, or art not, determined upon thy meaſures, with regard to the fine lady in thy power, enliven my heavy heart by thy communications; and thou wilt oblige 

Thy melancholy friend,J. BELFORD.LETTER XVIII. Mr.LOVELACE,ToJOHN BELFORD,Eſq
Friday Night, May19.WHEN I have opened my views to thee ſo amply, as I have done in my former letters; and have told thee, that my principal deſign is but to bring virtue to a trial, that,ifvirtue, it need not be afraid of; and that the reward of it will be marriage (that is to ſay, if, after I have carried my point, I cannot prevail upon her to live with me the Life of HonourSee Vol.III.p.111.; for that thou knoweſt is the wiſh of my heart); I am amazed at the repetition of thy wambling nonſenſe. 

I am of opinion with thee, that ſome time hence, when I amgrown wiſer,I ſhall conclude, thatthere is nothing but vanity, conceit, and nonſenſe, in my preſent wild ſchemes.But what is this ſaying, but that I muſt befirſtwiſer? 

I do not intendto let this matchleſs creature ſlide through my fingers. 

Art thou able to ſay half the things in her praiſe, that I have ſaid, and am continually ſaying or writing? 

Her gloomy father curſed the ſweet creature, becauſe ſhe put it out of his wicked power to compel her to have the man ſhe hated. Thou knoweſt how little merit ſhe has with me on this ſcore.—And ſhall I not try the virtue I intend, upon full proof, to reward, becauſe her father is a tyrant?—Why art thou thus eternally reflecting upon ſo excellent a woman, as if thou wert aſſured ſhe would fail in the trial?—Nay, thou declareſt, every time thou writeſt on the ſubject, that ſhewill,that ſhemuſtyield,intangled as ſhe is:And yet makeſt her virtue the pretence of thy ſolicitude for her. 

An inſtrument of the vile James Harlowe,doſt thou call me?—O Jack! how I could curſe thee!—Ianinſtrumentof that brother! of that ſiſter!—But mark the end—And thou ſhalt ſee what will become of that brother, and of that ſiſter! 

Play not againſt me my own acknowleged ſenſibilities, I deſire thee. Senſibilities which, at the ſame time that they contradict thy charge of anadamantine heartin thy friend, thou hadſt known nothing of, had I not communicated them to thee. 

If I ruin ſuch a virtue,ſayeſt thou?—Eternal monotoniſt!—Again;The moſt immaculate virtue may be ruined by men, who have no regard to their honour, and who make a jeſt of the moſt ſolemn oaths,&c. What muſt be the virtue that will be ruined without oaths? Is not the world full of theſe deceptions? And are notlovers oathsa jeſt of hundreds of years ſtanding? And are not cautions againſt the perfidy of our ſex, a neceſſary part of the female education? 

I do intend to endeavour to overcomemyſelf; but I muſt firſt try, if I cannot overcomethis lady.Have I not ſaid, that the honour of her Sex is concerned that I ſhouldtry? 

Whenever thou meeteſt with a woman of but half her perfections, thou wilt marry.—Do, Jack. 

Can a girl bedegraded by trials,who is notovercome? 

I am glad, that thou takeſt crime to thyſelf, for not endeavouring to convert the poor wretches whomothershave ruined. I will not recriminate upon thee, Belford, as I might, when thou flattereſt thyſelf, that thou never ruinedſt the morals of any young creature, who otherwiſe would not have been corrupted.—The palliating conſolation of an Hottentot heart, determined rather to gluttonize on the garbage of other ſoul feeders, than to reform.—But tell me, Jack, wouldſt thou have ſpared ſuch a girl as my Roſebud, had I not, by my example, engaged thy generoſity? Nor was my Roſebud the only girl I ſpared:—When my power was acknowleged, who more merciful than thy friend? 

It isreſiſtancethat inflames deſire,Sharpens the darts of love, and blows its fire.Love is diſarm'd that meets with too much eaſe;He languiſhes, and does not care to pleaſe.The women know this as well as the men. They love to be addreſſed with ſpirit;And therefore 'tis their golden fruit they guardWith ſo much care, to make poſſeſſion hard. 

Whence, for a by-reflection, the ardent, the complaiſant Gallant is ſo often preferr'd to the cold Huſband. And yet the Sex do not conſider, that Variety or Novelty gives the ardour and the obſequiouſneſs; and that, were the Rake as much uſed to them as the Huſband is, he would be (and is to his own wife, if married)asindifferent to their favours; and the Huſband, in his turn, would, to another woman, be the Rake. Let the women, upon the whole, take this leſſon from a Lovelace-Always to endeavour to make themſelves as New to a Huſband, and to appear as elegant and as obliging to him, as they are deſirous to appear to a Lover, and actually were to him asſuch; and then the Rake, which all women love, will laſt longer in the Huſband, than it generally does. 

But to return:—If I have not ſufficiently clear'd my conduct to thee in the above; I refer thee once more to mine of the 13th of laſt monthSee Vol.III.Letterxvii.p.103.. And pr'ythee, Jack, lay me not under a neceſſity to repeat the ſame things ſo often. I hope thou readeſt what I write more than once. 

I am not diſpleaſed that thou art ſo apprehenſive of my reſentment, that I cannot miſs a day, without making thee uneaſy. Thy conſcience, 'tis plain, tells thee, that thou haſt deſerved my diſpleaſure: And if it has convinced thee ofthat,it will make thee afraid of repeating thy fault. See that this be the conſequence. Elſe, now that thou haſt told me how I can puniſhthee, it is very likely that I do puniſh thee by my ſilence, altho' I have as much pleaſure in writing on this charming ſubject, as thou canſt have in reading what I write. 

When a boy, if a dog ran away from me thro' fear, I generally looked about for a ſtone, a ſtick, or a brickbat; and if neither offer'd to my hand, I ſkimm'd my hat after him, to make him afraid for ſomething. What ſignifies power, if we do not exert it? 

Let my Lord know thou haſt ſcribbled to me. But give him not the contents of thy epiſtle. Tho' a parcel of crude ſtuff,hewould think there was ſomething in it. Poor arguments will do in favour of what we like. But the ſtupid Peer little thinks, that this lady is a rebel to love. On the contrary, not only he, but all the world, believe her to be a volunteer in his ſervice.—So I ſhall incur blame, and ſhe will be pity'd, if any thing happen amiſs. 

Since my Lord's heart is ſo ſet upon this match, I have written already to let him know,'That my unhappy character has given my beloved an ungenerous diffidence of me. That ſhe is ſo mother-ſick and father-fond, that ſhe had rather return to Harlowe-Place, than marry. That ſhe is even apprehenſive, that the ſtep ſhe has taken of going off with me, will make the ladies of a family of ſuch name and rank as ours, think ſlightly of her. That therefore I deſire his Lordſhip (tho' this hint, I tell him, muſt be very delicately touched) to write me ſuch a letter as I can ſhew her. Let him treat me in it ever ſo freely, I ſhall not take it amiſs, becauſe I know his Lordſhip takes pleaſure in writing to me in a corrective ſtyle. That he may make what offers he pleaſes on the marriage. That I deſire his preſence at the ceremony; that I may take from his hand the greateſt bleſſing that mortal man can give me.' 

I have not abſolutely told the lady that I would write to his Lordſhip to this effect; yet have given her reaſon to think I will. So that without the laſt neceſſity I ſhall not produce the anſwer I expect from him: For I am very loth, I own, to make uſe of any of my family's names for the furthering of my deſigns. And yet I muſt make all ſecure, before I pull off the maſk. This was my motive for bringing her hither. 

Thus, thou ſeeſt, that the old Peer's letter came very ſeaſonably. I thank thee for it. But as to his ſentences, they cannot poſſibly do me good. I was early ſuffocated with hisWiſdom of nations.When a boy, I never aſked any thing of him, but out flew aproverb; and if the tendency of that was to deny me, I never could obtain the leaſt favour. This gave me ſo great an averſion to the very word, that, when a child, I made it a condition with my tutor, who was an honeſt parſon, that I would not read my Bible at all, if he would not excuſe me one of the wiſeſt books in it: To which, however, I had no other objection, than that it was calledThe Proverbs.And as for Solomon, he was then a hated character with me, not becauſe of his polygamy, but becauſe I had conceived him to be ſuch another muſty old fellow as my uncle. 

Well, but let us leave old ſaws to old men.—What ſignifies thy tedious whining over thy departing relation? Is it not generally agreed, that he cannot recover? Will it not be kind in thee, to put him out of his miſery? I hear, that he is peſter'd ſtill with viſits from doctors, and apothecaries, and ſurgeons; that they cannot cut ſo deep as the mortification has gone; and that in every viſit, in every ſcarification, inevitable death is pronounced upon him. Why then do they keep tormenting him? Is it not to take away more of his living fleece than of his dead fleſh?—When a man is given over, the fee ſhould ſurely be refuſed. Are they not now robbing his heirs?—What haſt thou to do, if the will be as thou'dſt have it?—He ſent for thee [Did he not?] to cloſe his eyes. He is but anuncle,is he? 

Let me ſee, if I miſtake not, it is in the Bible, or ſome other good book: Can it be in Herodotus?—O, I believe it is in Joſephus; A half-ſacred and half-profane author. He tells us of a king of Syria, put out of his pain by his prime miniſter, or one who deſerved to be ſo for his contrivance. The ſtory ſays, if I am right, that he ſpread a wet cloth over his face, which killing him, he reigned in his place. A notable fellow! Perhaps this wet cloth, in the original, is what we now calllaudanum; a potion that overſpreads the faculties, as the wet cloth did the face of the royal patient, and the tranſlator knew not how to render it. 

But how like a forlorn varlet thou ſubſcribeſt,Thy melancholy friend,J. BELFORD!—Melancholy! for what? To ſtand by, and ſee fair play between an old man and death? I thought thou hadſt been more of a man; thou that art not afraid of an acute death, a ſword's point, to be ſo plaguily hyp'd at the conſequences of a chronical one?—What tho' the ſcarificators work upon him day by day? it is only upon acaput mortuum:And pr'ytheeGo to,to uſe theſtylum veterum,and learn of theRoyal butchers; who, for ſport [an hundred times worſe men than thy Lovelace] widow ten thouſand at a bruſh, and make twice as many fatherleſs; and are dubb'dMagnusorLe Grandfor it: Learn ofthem,I ſay, how to ſupport aſingledeath. 

I wiſhmyuncle had givenmethe opportunity of ſetting thee a better example: Thou ſhouldſt have ſeen what a brave fellow I had been. And had I had occaſion to write, my concluſion would have been this: 'I hope the old Trojan's happy. In that hope, I am ſo; and 

'Thy rejoicing friend,'R. LOVELACE.'Dwell not always, Jack, upon one ſubject. Let me have poor Belton's ſtory; the ſooner the better. If I can be of ſervice to him, tell him he may command me, either in purſe or perſon. Yet the former with a freer will than the latter; for how can I leave my goddeſs? But I'll iſſue my commands to my other vaſſals to attend thy ſummons. If ye wanthead,let me know. If not, my quota on this occaſion ismoney. 

LETTER XIX. Mr.BELFORD,ToROBERT LOVELACE,Eſq
Saturday, May20.NOT one word will I reply to ſuch an abandon'd wretch, as thou haſt ſhewn thyſelf to be in thine of laſt night. I will leave the lady to the protection of that Power who only can work miracles; and to her own merits. Still I have hopes that theſe will ſave her. 

I will proceed, as thou deſireſt, to poor Belton's caſe; and the rather, as it has thrown me into ſuch a train of thinking upon our paſt lives, our preſent courſes, and our future views, as may be of ſervice to both, if I can give due weight to the reflections that ariſe from it. 

The poor man made me a viſit on Thurſday, in this my melancholy attendance. He began with complaints of his ill health and ſpirits, his hectic cough, and his increaſed malady of ſpitting of blood; and then led to his ſtory. 

A confounded one it is; and which highly aggravates his other maladies: For it has come out, that his Thomaſine (who truly would be new-chriſten'd, you know, that her name might be nearer in ſound to the chriſtian name of the man whom ſhe pretended to doat upon) has for many years carried on an intriguewith a fellow who had been hoſtler to her father (an•innkeeper at Darking); of whom, at the expence o•poor Tom, ſhe has made a gentleman; and managed it ſo, that having the art to make herſelf his caſhier, ſhe has been unable to account for large ſums, which poor Belton thought forthcoming at his demand, and had truſted to her cuſtody, in order to pay off a mortgage upon his paternal eſtate in Kent, which his heart had run upon leaving clear; but which cannot now be done, and will ſoon be forecloſed. And yet ſhe has ſo long paſſed for his wife, that he knows not what to reſolve upon about her; nor about the two boys he was ſo fond of, ſuppoſing them to be his; whereas now he begins to doubt his ſhare in them. 

So KEEPING don't do, Lovelace. 'Tis not the eligible life.'A man mykeep a woman,ſaid the poor fellow to me, butnot his eſtate!—Two intereſts!—Then, my tottering fabric!'pointing to his emaciated carcaſe. 

We do well to value ourſelves upon ourliberty,or, to ſpeak more properly, upon the liberties we take! We had need to run down matrimony as we do, and to make that ſtate the ſubject of our frothy jeſts; when we frequently render ourſelves [for this of Tom's is not aſingularcaſe] the dupes and fools of women, who generally govern us (by arts our wiſe heads penetrate not) more abſolutely than a wife would attempt to do! 

Let us conſider this point a little; and that upon our ownprinciples,aslibertines,ſetting aſide what thelaws of our country,and itscuſtoms,oblige from us; which, nevertheleſs, we cannot get over, till we have got over almoſt all moral obligations, as members of ſociety. 

In the firſt place, let us conſider [we, who are in poſſeſſion of eſtates bylegal deſcent], how we ſhould have liked to have been ſuch naked deſtitute varlets as we muſt have been, had our fathers been as wiſeas ourſelves; and deſpiſed matrimony as we do—And then let us aſk ourſelves, if we ought not to have the ſame regard forourpoſterity, as we are glad our fathers had fortheirs? 

But this, perhaps, is toomorala conſideration.—To proceed therefore to thoſe which will be more ſtriking tous,How can we reaſonably expect oeconomy or frugality (or any thing indeed but riot and waſte) from creatures who have anintereſt,and muſt therefore haveviews,different from our own? 

They know the uncertain tenure [our fickle humours] by which they hold: And is it to be wonder'd at, ſuppoſing them to be provident harlots, that they ſhould endeavour, if they have thepower, to lay up againſt a rainy day; or, if they havenotthe power, that they ſhould ſquander all they can come at, when they are ſure ofnothing but the preſent hour; and when the life they live, and the ſacrifices they have made, put conſcience and honour out of the queſtion? 

Whereas awife,having the ſame family-intereſt with her huſband, lies not under either the ſameapprehenſionsortemptations; and has not broken through [ofneceſſity,at leaſt, has not]thoſereſtraints which education has faſten'd upon her: And if ſhe make a private purſe, which we are told by anti-matrimonialiſts, all wives love to do, and has children, it goes all into the ſame family, at the long-run. 

Then, as to the great article of fidelity to your bed, are not women of family, who are well-educated, under greater reſtraints, than creatures, who, if they everhadreputation, ſacrifice it to ſordid intereſt, or to more ſordid appetite, the moment they give up to you? Does not the example you furniſh, of having ſucceeded with her, give encouragement forothersto attempt her likewiſe? For, with all her blandiſhments, can any man be ſo credulous,or ſo vain, as to believe, that the womanbecould perſuade,anothermay not prevail upon? 

Adultery is ſo capital a guilt, that even rakes and libertines, if not wholly abandon'd, and, as I may ſay,invitedby a woman's levity, diſavow and condemn it: But here, in a ſtate of KEEPING, a woman is in no danger of incurring,legally,at leaſt, that guilt; and you yourſelf have broken thro', and overthrown in her, all the fences and boundaries of moral honeſty, and the modeſty and reſerves of her Sex: And what tie ſhall hold her againſt inclination, or intereſt? And what ſhall deter an attempter? 

While a huſband has this ſecurity fromlegalſanctions, that if his wife be detected in a criminal converſation with a man of fortune [themoſtlikely by bribes to ſeduce her], he may recover very great damages, and procure a divorce beſides: Which, to ſay nothing of the ignominy, is a conſideration that muſt have ſome force uponbothparties. And a wife muſt be vicious indeed, and a reflection upon a man's own choice, who, for the ſake of change, and where there are no qualities to ſeduce, nor affluence to corrupt, will run ſo many hazards to injure her huſband in the tendereſt of all points. 

But there are difficulties in procuring a divorce—[And ſo there ought:]—And none, ſays the rake, in parting with a miſtreſs, whenever you ſuſpect her; or, whenever, weary of her, you have a mind to change her for another. 

But muſt not the man be a brute indeed, who can caſt off a woman, whom he has ſeduced [If he take her from the town, that's another thing], without ſome flagrant reaſon; ſomething that will better juſtify him tohimſelf,as well as toher,and to theworld,than merepowerandnovelty? 

But I don't ſee, if we judge byfact,and by thepracticeof all we have been acquainted with, of theKeeping claſs,that we know how to part with them when we have them. 

That we know wecanif wewill,is all we have forit:And this leads us to bear many things from amiſtreſs,which we would not from awife.But if we are good-natur'd and humane: If the woman hasart[And what womanwantsit, who has fallen byart?and to whoſe precarious ſituationartis ſo neceſſary?] If you have given her the credit of being called by your name: If you have a ſettled place of abode, and have received and paid viſits in her company, as your wife: If ſhe has brought you children; you will allow, that theſe are ſtrong obligations upon you, in the world's eye, as well as to your own heart, againſt tearing yourſelf from ſuch cloſe connexions. She will ſtick to you as your ſkin: And it will be next to flaying yourſelf to caſt her off. 

Even if there becauſefor it, by infidelity, ſhe will have managed ill, if ſhe have not her defenders—Nor did I ever know a cauſe, or a perſon, ſobad,as to want advocates, either from ill will to the one, or pity to the other; and you will then be thought a hard-hearted miſcreant: And even were ſhe to go off without credit toherſelf,ſhe will leaveyouas little; eſpecially with all thoſe whoſe good opinion a man would wiſh to cultivate. 

Well, then, ſhall this poor privilege, that we may part with a woman, if wewill,be deem'd a balance for the other inconveniencies? Shall it be thought byus,who are men of family and fortune, an equivalent for giving up equality of degree; and taking for the partner of our bed, and very probably more than the partner in our eſtates (to the breach of all family-rule and order), a low-born, a low-educated creature, who has not brought any-thing into the common ſtock; and can poſſibly make no returns for the ſolid benefits ſhe receives, but thoſe libidinous ones, whicha man cannot boaſt of, but tohisdiſgrace, nor think of, but to the ſhame ofboth? 

Moreover, as the man advances in years, the fury of his libertiniſm will go off. He will have different aims and purſuits, which will diminiſh his appetite to ranging, and make ſuch a regular life as the matrimonial and family-life, palatable to him, and every day more palatable. 

If he has children, and has reaſon to think themhis,and if his lewd courſes have left him any eſtate, he will have cauſe to regret thereſtrainthis boaſtedlibertyhas laid him under, and the valuableprivilegeit has deprived him of; when he finds, that it muſt deſcend to ſome relation, for whom, whether near or diſtant, he cares not one farthing; and who, perhaps, from his diſſolute life, if a man of virtue, has held him in the utmoſt contempt. 

And were we to ſuppoſe his eſtate in his power to bequeath as he pleaſes; why ſhould a man reſolve, for the gratifying of his wicked humour only, to baſtardize his race? Why ſhould he wiſh to expoſe them to the ſcorn and inſults of the reſt of the world?—Why ſhould he, whether they are men or women, lay them under the neceſſity of complying with propoſals of marriage, either inferior as to fortune, or unequal as to age?—Why ſhould he deprive the children he loves, and who are themſelves guilty of no fault (if they have regard to morals, and to legal and ſocial ſanctions), of the reſpect they would wiſh to have, and to deſerve?—and of the opportunity of aſſociating themſelves with proper, that is to ſay, withreputablecompany?—And why ſhould he make them think themſelves under obligation to every perſon of character, who ſhould vouchſafe to viſit them▪What little reaſon, in a word, would ſuch children have to bleſs their father's obſtinate defiance of the laws and cuſtoms of his country; and for giving thema mother, whom they could not think of with honour; to whoſecrimeit was, that they owed their very beings, and whoſe example it was their duty to ſhun? 

If the education and morals of theſe children are left to chance, as too generally they are (for the man who has humanity and a feeling heart, and who is capable of fondneſs for his offspring, I take it for granted, will marry); the caſe is ſtill worſe; his crime is perpetuated, as I may ſay, by his children: And the Sea, the Army, perhaps the Highway, for the boys; the Common for the girls; too often point out the way to a worſe cataſtrophe. 

What therefore, upon the whole, do we get by treading in theſe crooked paths, but danger, diſgrace, and a too late repentance? 

And after all, do we not frequently become the cullies of our own libertiniſm; ſliding into the very ſtate with thoſe half-worn-out doxies; which, perhaps we might have enter'd into with their ladies; at leaſt with their ſuperiors, both in degree and fortune? And all the time, lived handſomely like ourſelves; not ſneaking into holes and corners; and, when we crept abroad with our women, looking about us at every opening into the ſtreet or day, as if we were confeſſedly accountable to the cenſures of all honeſt people. 

My couſin Tony Jenyns, thou kneweſt. He had not the actively miſchievous ſpirit, that Thou, Belton, Mowbray, Myſelf, and Tourville, have: But he imbibed the ſame notions we do, and carried them into practice. 

How did he prate againſt wedlock! How did he ſtrut about as awitand aſmart!And what awitand aſmartdid all the boys and girls of our family, myſelf among the reſt, then an urchin, think him, for the airs he gave himſelf?—Marry! No, not for the world; what man of ſenſe would bear the inſolences,the petulances, the expenſiveneſs of a wife! He could not for the heart of him think it tolerable, that a woman ofequalrank and fortune, and, as it might happen,ſuperiortalents to his own, ſhould look upon herſelf to have a right to ſhare the benefit of that fortune which ſhe brought him. 

So, after he had flutter'd about the town for two or three years, in all which time he had a better opinion of himſelf than any-body elſe had, what does he do, but enter upon an affair with his fencing-maſter's daughter? 

He ſucceeds, takes private lodgings for her at Hackney; viſits her by ſtealth, both of them tender of reputations, that wereextremelytender, but which neither had quite given over; for rakes of either ſex are always the laſt to condemn or cry down themſelves: Viſited by nobody, nor viſiting: The life of a thief, or of a man beſet by creditors, afraid to look out of his own houſe, or to be ſeen abroad with her. And thus went he on for twelve years, and, tho' he had a good eſtate, hardly making both ends meet; for, tho' no glare, there was no oeconomy; and beſides, he had every year a child, and very fond of them was he. But none of them lived above three years: And being now, on the death of the dozenth, grown as dully ſober, as if he had been a real huſband, his good Mrs. Thomas (for he had not permitted her to take his own name) prevailed upon him, to think the loſs of their children a judgment upon the parents for their wicked way of life [There is a time, when calamities will beget reflection! The royal cully of France, thou knoweſt, wasMaintenon'd into it by his ill ſucceſſes in the field]: And ſo, when more than half-worn outbothof them, the ſorry fellow took it into his head to marry her: And then had leiſure to ſit down, and contemplate the many offers of perſons of family and fortune, which he had declined in the prime of his life: His expencesequalat leaſt: His reputation not onlyleſs,butloſt:His enjoymentsſtollen:His partnerſhipunequal,and ſuch as he had always been aſhamed of. But the women ſaid, That after twelve years cohabitation, Tony did an honeſt thing by her. And that was all my poor couſin got by making his old miſtreſs his new wife:—Not a drum, not a trumpet, not a fife, not a tabret, nor the expectation of a new joy, to animate him on! 

What Belton will do with his Thomaſine, I know not; nor care I to adviſe him: For I ſee the poor fellow does not like that any-body ſhould curſe her but himſelf: And that he does very heartily. And ſo low is he reduced, that he blubbers over the reflection upon his paſt fondneſs for her cubs, and upon his preſent doubts of their being his:'What a d—n'd thing is it, Belford, if Tom and Hall ſhould be the hoſtler dog's puppies, and not mine!'Very true! and I think the ſtrong health of the chubby-faced, muſcular whelps, confirms the too great probability. But I ſay not ſo to him. 

You, he ſays, are ſuch a gay, lively mortal, that this ſad tale would make no impreſſion upon you: Eſpecially now, that your whole heart is engaged as it is. Mowbray would be too violent upon it; he has not, he ſays, a feeling heart: Tourville has no diſcretion: And, a pretty jeſt! although he and his Thomaſine lived without reputation in the world (People gueſſing that they were not married, notwithſtanding ſhe went by his name); yet'he would nottoo muchdiſcredit thecurſed ingrateneither!'—Could a man act a weaker part, had he been really married; and were he ſure he was going to ſeparate from the mother of his own children? 

I leave this as a leſſon upon thy heart, without making any application: Only, with this remark, That after we libertines have indulged our licentious appetites, reflecting in the conceit of our vain hearts, both with our lips and by our lives, upon our anceſ••rs, and the good old ways, we find out, when wecome to years of diſcretion, if we live till then [what all who knew us found out before, that is to ſay, we find out] our own deſpicable folly; that thoſe good old ways would have been beſt forus,as well as for the reſt of the world; and that in every ſtep we have deviated from them, we have only expoſed our vanity and our ignorance at the ſame time. 

J. BELFORD.LETTER XX. Mr.LOVELACE,ToJOHN BELFORD,Eſq
Saturday, May20.I Am pleaſed with the ſober reflection thou concludeſt thy laſt with; and I thank thee for it: Poor Belton!—I did not think his Thomaſine would have proved ſo very a devil. But this muſt everlaſtingly be the riſque of a keeper, who takes up with a low-bred girl. This I never did. Nor had I occaſion to do. Such a one asI,Jack, needed only, till now, to ſhake the ſtatelieſt tree, and the mellow'd fruit dropt into my mouth: Always of Montaign's taſte, thou knoweſt:—Thought it a glory to ſubdue a girl of family.—More truly delightful to me the ſeduction-progreſs than the crowning act:—For that's a vapour, a bubble!—And moſt cordially do I thank thee for thy indirect hint, that I am right in my preſent purſuit. 

From ſuch a lady as Miſs Harlowe, a man is ſecured from all the inconveniencies thou expatiateſ•upon. 

Once more, therefore, do I thank thee, Belford, for thy approbation!—One need not, as thou ſayeſt, ſneak into holes and corners, and ſhun the day, in the company of ſuch a lady as this. How friendly in thee, thus to abet the favourite purpoſe of my heart!—Nor can it be a diſgrace to me, to permit ſuch a lady to be called by my name!—Norſhall I be at all concerned about the world's cenſure, if I live to theyears of diſcretion,which thou mentioneſt, ſhould I be taken in, and prevailed upon to tread with her the good old path of my anceſtors. 

A bleſſing on thy heart, thou honeſt fellow! Ithoughtthou wert but in jeſt, or acting but by my uncle's deſire, when thou wert pleading for matrimony in behalf of this lady!—It could not be principle, I knew, in thee: It could not be compaſſion—A littleenvyindeed I ſuſpected!—But now I ſee thee once more thyſelf: And once more, ſay I, A bleſſing on thy heart, thou true friend, and very honeſt fellow! 

Now will I proceed with courage in all my ſchemes, and oblige thee with the continued narrative of my progreſſions towards bringing them to effect!—But I could not forbear to interrupt my ſtory, to ſhew my gratitude! 

LETTER XXI. Mr.LOVELACE,ToJOHN BELFORD,Eſq
Saturday, May20.AND now will I favour thee with a brief account of our preſent ſituation. 

From the higheſt to the loweſt we are all extremely happy.—Dorcasſtands well in her lady's graces.Pollyhas aſked her advice in relation to a courtſhip affair of her own. No oracle ever gave better.Sallyhas had a quarrel with her woollen-draper; and made my beloved Lady-chancellor in it. She blamed Sally for behaving tyrannically to a man who loves her. Dear creature! to ſtand againſt a glaſs, and to ſhut her eyes becauſe ſhe will not ſee her face in it!—Mrs. Sinclair has paidhercourt to ſo unerring a judge, by requeſting her advice with regard to both nieces. 

This the way we have been in for ſeveral days with the people below. Yetſolagenerally at her meals,and ſeldom at other times in their company. They now, uſed to her ways [Perſeverance muſt conquer], never preſs her; ſo when they meet, all is civility on both ſides. Even marry'd people, I believe, Jack, prevent abundance of quarrels, by ſeeing one another but ſeldom. 

But how ſtands it between thyſelf and the lady, methinks thou aſkeſt, ſince her abrupt departure from thee, and undutiful repulſe of Wedneſday morning? Why, pretty well in the main. Nay, very well. For why? The dear ſaucy-face knows not how to help herſelf. Can fly to no other protection. And has, beſides, overheard a converſation [Who would have thought ſhe had been ſo near?] which paſſed between Mrs. Sinclair, Miſs Martin, and myſelf, that very Wedneſday afternoon; which has ſet her heart at eaſe, with reſpect to ſeveral doubtful points. 

Such as, particularly, Mrs. Fretchville's unhappy ſtate of mind:—Moſt humanely pitied by Miſs Martin, who knows her very well; the huſband ſhe has loſt, and herſelf, lovers from their cradles. Pity from one begets pity from another; and ſo many circumſtances were given to poor Mrs. Fretchville's diſtreſs, that it was impoſſible but my beloved muſtextremelypity her, whom the leſs tender-hearted Miſs Martingreatlypitied. 

My Lord M.'s gout his only hindrance from viſiting my ſpouſe. 

Lady Betty and Miſs Montague ſoon expected i•town. 

My earneſt deſire ſignify'd to have my ſpouſe receiv•them in her own houſe, if Mrs. Fretchville would bu•know her own mind. 

My intention to ſtay at their houſe notwithſtanding,as I ſaid I had told them before,in order to grati••her utmoſt punctilio. 

My paſſion for my beloved, which I told them, is a high and fervent accent, was the trueſt that m•could have for woman, I boaſted of. It was, in ſhort, I ſaid, of thetrue Platonic kind; or I had no notion of what Platonic Love was. 

So it is, Jack; and muſt end as Platonic Love generally does end. 

Sally and Mrs. Sinclair praiſed,but not groſly,my beloved. Sally particularly admired her purity, called it exemplary; yet, to avoid ſuſpicion, expreſſed her thoughts, that ſhe was-rather over-nice,if ſhe might preſume to ſay ſo before me. But applauded me for the ſtrict obſervation I made of my vow. 

I more freely blamed her reſerves to me; called her cruel; inveighed againſt her relations; doubted her love. Every favour I aſked of her deny'd me. Yet my behaviour to her as pure and delicate when alone, as when before them. Hinted at ſomething that had paſſed between us that very day, that ſhewed her indifference to me in ſo ſtrong a light, that I could not bear it. But that I would aſk her for her company to the play ofVenice preſerv'd,given out for Saturday night, as a benefit play; the prime actors to be in it; and this to ſee, if I were to be denied every favour.—Yet, for my own part, I loved not tragedies; tho' ſhe did, for the ſake of the inſtruction, the warning, and the example generally given in them. 

I had too muchfeeling,I ſaid. There was enough in the world to make our hearts ſad, without carrying grief into our diverſions, and making the diſtreſſes of others our own. 

True enough, Belford; and I believe, generally ſpeaking, that all the men of our caſt are of my mind—They love not any tragedies but thoſe in which they themſelves act the parts of tyrants and executioners; and, afraid to truſt themſelves with ſerious and ſolemn reflections, run to comedies, to laugh away the diſtreſſes they have occaſioned, and to find examples ofas immoral men as themſelves. For very few of our comic performances, as thou knoweſt, give us good ones.—I anſwer, however, for myſelf—Yet thou, I think, on recollection, loveſt to deal in thelamentable. 

Sally anſwered for Polly, who was abſent, Mrs. Sinclair for herſelf, and for all her acquaintance, even for Miſs Partington, in preferring the comic to the tragic ſcenes.—And I believe they are right; for the devil's in it, if a confided-in rake does not give a girl enough of tragedy in his comedy. 

I aſk'd Sally to oblige my fair-one with her company. 

She was engaged [That was right, thou'lt ſuppoſe]. I aſked Mrs. Sinclair's leave for Polly. To be ſure, ſhe anſwer'd, Polly would think it an honour to attend Mrs. Lovelace: But the poor thing was tender-hearted; and as the tragedy was deep, would weep herſelf blind. 

Sally, mean time, objected Singleton, thatImight anſwer the objection, and ſave my beloved the trouble of making it, or debating the point with me. 

I then, from a letter juſt before received from one in her father's family, warned them of a perſon who had undertaken to find us out, and whom I thus in writing (calling for pen and ink) deſcribed, that they might arm all the family againſt him—'A ſun-burnt, pock-fretten ſailor, ill-looking, big-boned; his ſtature about ſix foot; an heavy eye, an over-hanging brow, a deck-treading ſtride in his walk; a couteau generally by his ſide; lips parched from his gums, as if by ſtaring at the ſun in hot climates; a brown coat; a colour'd handkerchief about his neck; an oaken plant in his hand, near as long as himſelf, and proportionably thick.' 

No queſtions muſt be anſwer'd, that he ſhould aſk. They ſhould call me to him. But not let my beloved know a tittle of this, ſo long as it could be help'd. And I added, that if her brother or Singletoncame, and if they behaved civilly, I would, for her ſake, be civil tothem:And in this caſe, ſhe had nothing to do, but to own her marriage, and there could be no pretence for violence on either ſide. But moſt fervently I ſwore, that if ſhe was convey'd away, either by perſuaſion or force, I would directly, on miſſing her but one day, go to demand her at her father's, whether ſhe were there or not; and if I recover'd not a ſiſter, I would have a brother; and ſhould find out a captain of a ſhip as well as he. And now, Jack, doſt thou think ſhe'll attempt to get from me, do what I will? 

Mrs. Sinclair began to be afraid of miſchief in her houſe—I was apprehenſive that ſhe would overdo the matter, and be out of character. I therefore wink'd at her. She primm'd; nodded, to ſhew ſhe took me, twang'd out a high-ho, lapp'd one horſe-lip over the other, and was ſilent. 

Here's preparation, Belford!—Doſt think I will throw it all away, for any thing thou canſt ſay, or Lord M. write?—No indeed!—as my charmer ſays, when ſhe bridles. 

AND what muſt neceſſarily be the conſequence of all this, with regard to my beloved's behaviour to me?—Canſt thou doubt, that it was all complaiſance next time ſhe admitted me into her preſence? 

Thurſday we were very happy. All the morningextremelyhappy. I kiſſed her charming hand—I need not deſcribe to thee her hand and arm. When thou ſaweſt her, I took notice that thy eyes dwelt upon them, whenever thou couldſt ſpare them from that beauty-ſpot of wonders, her face.Fiftytimes kiſſed her hand, I believe.—Once her cheek, intending her•lip, but ſo rapturouſly, that ſhe could not help ſeeming angry. 

Had ſhe not thus kept me at arms-length; had ſhe not denied me thoſe innocent liberties which ourSex, from degree to degree, aſpire to; could I but have gained acceſs to her in her hours of heedleſſneſs and diſhabille (for full dreſs creates dignity, augments conſciouſneſs, and compels diſtance), we had been familiarized to each other long ago. But keep her up ever ſo late; meet her ever ſo early; by breakfaſt-time dreſſed for the day; and at her earlieſt hour, as nice as others dreſſed.—All her forms thus kept up, wonder not that I have made ſo little progreſs in the propoſed trial.—But how muſt all this diſtance ſtimulate! 

Thurſday morning,I ſaid, we were extremely happy—Aboutnoon,ſhe number'd the hours ſhe had been with me; all of them to me but as one minute; and deſired to be left to herſelf. I was loth to comply: But obſerving the ſun-ſhine begin to ſhut in, I yielded. 

I dined out. Returned; talked of the houſe, and of Mrs. Fretchville: Had ſeen Mennell—Had preſſed him to get the widow to quit—She pitied Mrs. Fretchville—Another good effect of the overheard converſation—Had written to my uncle; expected an anſwer ſoon from him. I was admitted to ſup with her. Urged for her approbation or correction of my written terms. She promiſed an anſwer as ſoon as ſhe had heard from Miſs Howe. 

Then I preſſed for her company to the play on Saturday night. She made objections, as I had foreſeen: Her brother's projects, warmth of the weather,&c.But in ſuch a manner, as if half-afraid to diſoblige me [Another happy effect of the overheard converſation]. Got over theſe therefore; and ſhe conſented to favour me. 

Fridaypaſſed as the day before. 

Here were two happy days to both!—Why cannot I make every day equally happy? It looks as if it wer•in my power to do ſo.—Strange I ſhould thus deligh•in teazing a woman I ſo dearly love!—I muſt, doubt, have ſomething in my temper like Miſs Howewho loves to plague the man who puts himſelf in her power.—But I could not do thus by ſuch an angel as this, did I not believe, that after her probation-time is expired, and if there is no bringing her tocohabitation(my darling view), I ſhall reward her as ſhe wiſhes. 

Saturdayis half-over, equally happy—Preparing for the play—Polly has offer'd, and is accepted. I have directed her where to weep—And this not only to ſhew her humanity [a weeping eye indicates a gentle heart], but to have a pretence to hide her face with her fan or handkerchief; yet Polly is far from being every man's girl—And we ſhall ſit in the gallery green-box. 

The woes of others ſo well repreſented, as thoſe of Belvidera particularly will be, muſt, I hope, unlock and open my charmer's heart. Whenever I have been able to prevail upon a girl to permit me to attend her to a play, I have thought myſelf ſure of her. The female heart, all gentleneſs and harmony, when obliged, expands, and forgets its forms, when attention is carried out of itſelf at an agreeable or affecting entertainment: Muſic, and perhaps a collation afterwards, co-operating. I have no hope of ſuch an effect here; but I have more than one end to anſwer, by my earneſtneſs in getting her to a play. To name but one: Dorcas has a maſter-key, as I have told thee—And it were worth carrying her toVenice preſerved,were it but to ſhew her, that there have been, and may be, much deeper diſtreſſes than ſhe can poſſibly know. 

Thus exceedingly happy are we at preſent. I hope we ſhall not find any of Nat. Lee's left-handed gods at work, to daſh our bowl of joy with wormwood. 

The Lady, in her next letter, dated Friday, May 19. acquaints her friend, that her proſpects are once more mended; and that ſhe has known four-and-twenty hours together, ſince her laſt, not unhappyones, her ſituation conſidered.'How willing am I,ſays ſhe,to compound for tolerable appearances! how deſirous to turn the funny ſide of things towards me, and to hope, where reaſon for hope offers! and this, not only for my own ſake, but for yours, who take ſuch generous concern in all that befalls me.' 

She then gives the particulars of the converſation which ſhe had overheard between Mr. Lovelace, Mrs. Sinclair, and Miſs Martin; but accounts more minutely than he had done, for the opportunity ſhe had of overhearing it, unknown to them. 

She gives the reaſon ſhe has to be pleaſed with what ſhe heard from each: But is ſhocked at the meaſure he is reſolved to take, if he miſſes her but for one day. Yet is pleaſed, that he propoſes to avoidaggreſſiveviolence, if her brother and he meet in town. 

She thought herſelf obliged, ſhe ſays, from what paſſed between them on Wedneſday, and from what ſhe overheard him ſay, to conſent to go with him to the play; eſpecially, as he had the diſcretion to propoſe one of the nieces to accompany her. 

She expreſſes herſelf pleaſed, that he has actually written to Lord M. 

She tells her, that ſhe has promiſed to give him an anſwer to his propoſals, as ſoon as ſhe has heard fromheron the ſubject: And hopes, that in her future letter ſhe ſhall have reaſon to confirm theſe favourable appearances.'Favourable,ſays ſhe,I muſt think them in the wreck I have ſuffer'd.' 

She thinks it not amiſs, however, that ſhe ſhould perfect her ſcheme with Mrs. Townſend. He is certainly, ſhe ſays, a deep and dangerous man; and it is therefore but prudence to be watchful, and to provide againſt the worſt. 

She is certain, ſhe tells her, that her letters are ſafe. 

He would never be out of her company by his good-will; otherwiſe ſhe has no doubt that ſhe is miſtreſs of her goings-out and comings-in; and did ſhe think it needful, and were ſhe not afraid of her brother, and Capt. Singleton, would oftener put it to trial. 

LETTER XXII. MiſsHOWE,To MiſsCLARISSA HARLOWE.
Saturday, May20.I Did not know, my dear, that you deferred giving an anſwer to Mr. Lovelace's propoſals, till you had my opinion of them. A particular hand occaſionally going to town, will leave this at Wilſon's, that no delay may be made on that account. 

I never had any doubt of the man's juſtice and generoſity in matters of ſettlement; and all his relations are as noble in their ſpirits, as in their deſcent: Butnow,it may not be amiſs for you to wait, to ſee what returns my Lord makes to his letter of invitation. 

The ſcheme I think of is this. 

There is a perſon (I believe you have ſeen her with me), one Mrs. Townſend, who is a great dealer in Indian ſilks, Bruſſels and French laces, cambricks, linen, and other valuable goods; which ſhe has a way of coming at, duty-free; and has a great vead for them, and for other curioſities which ſhe imports, in the private families of the gentry round us. 

She has her days of being in town, and then is at a chamber ſhe rents in an inn in Southwark, where ſhe has patterns of all her ſilks, and much of her portable goods, for the conveniency of her London cuſtomers. But her place of reſidence, and where ſhe has her principal warehouſe, is at Deptford, for the opportunity of getting her goods on ſhore. 

She was firſt brought to me by my mother, to whom ſhe was recommended, on the ſuppoſal of my ſpeedymarriage; that I might have an opportunity to be as fine as a princeſs, was my mamma's expreſſion, at a moderate expence. 

Now, my dear, I muſt own, that I do not love to encourage theſe contraband traders. What is it, but bidding defiance to the laws of our country, when we do; and hurting fair traders; and at the ſame time robbing our Prince of his legal due, to the diminution of thoſe duties which poſſibly muſt be made good by new levies upon the whole public? 

But, however, Mrs. Townſend and I, though we have not yet dealt, are upon a very good foot of underſtanding. She is a ſenſible woman; ſhe has been abroad, and often goes abroad, in the way of her buſineſs; and gives very entertaining accounts of all ſhe has ſeen. And having applied to me, to recommend her to you (as it is her view to be known to young ladies, who are likely to change their condition), I am ſure I can engage her to give you protection at her houſe at Deptford; which ſhe ſays is a populous village; and one of the laſt, I ſhould think, that you would be ſought for in. She is not much there, you will believe, by the courſe of her dealings; but, no doubt, muſt have ſomebody on the ſpot, in whom ſhe can confide: And there perhaps you might be ſafe, till your couſin comes. And I ſhould not think it amiſs, that you write to him out of hand. I cannot ſuggeſt to you what you ſhould write. That muſt be left to your own diſcretion. For you will be afraid, no doubt, of the conſequence of a variance between the two men. 

I will think further of this ſcheme of mine, in relation to Mrs. Townſend, if you find it neceſſary that I ſhould. But I hope there will be no occaſion to do ſo, ſince your proſpects ſeem to be changed, and that you have hadtwenty-four-not unhappy hours together.How my indignation riſes for this poor conſolation in the courtſhip (courtſhipmuſt I call it?) of ſuch a lady! 

Mrs. Townſend, as I have recollected, has two brothers, each a maſter of a veſſel; and who knows, as ſhe and they have great concerns together, but that, in caſe of need, you may have a whole ſhip's crew at your devotion? If he give your cauſe to leave him, take no thought for the people at Harlowe-place. Let them take care of one another. It is a care they areuſedto. The Law will help to ſecure them. The wretch is no aſſaſſin; no night-murderer. He is anopen,becauſe afearleſsenemy; and ſhould he attempt any thing that ſhould make him obnoxious to the Laws of ſociety, you might have a fair riddance of him either by flight or the gallows; no matter which. 

Had you not been ſo minute in your account of the circumſtances that attended the opportunity you had of overhearing the dialogue between Mr. Lovelace and two of the women, I ſhould have thought the conference contrived on purpoſe for your ears. 

I ſhew'd Mr. Lovelace's propoſals to Mr. Hickman, who had chambers once at Lincoln's-Inn, being deſigned for the Law, had his elder brother lived. He looked ſo wiſe, ſo proud, and ſo important, upon the occaſion; and wanted to take ſo much conſideration about them—would take them home if I pleaſed—and weigh them well—and ſo-forth—and the like—and all that—that I had no patience with him, and ſnatched them back with anger. 

O dear!—to be ſo angry, and pleaſe me, for his zeal— 

Yes, zeal without knowlege, I ſaid—like moſt other zeals—If there were no objections that ſtruck him at once, there were none. 

Sohaſty,deareſt Madam!— 

And ſoſlow,un-deareſt Sir, I could have ſaid—But, SURELY, ſaid I, with a look which imply'd,Would you rebel, Sir!— 

He begged my pardon—Sawno objection, indeed!—But might he be allowed once more— 

No matter—No matter—I would have ſhewn them to my mother, I ſaid, who, tho' of no Inn of Court, knew more of theſe things than half the lounging lubbers of them; and that at firſt ſight—only that ſhe would have been provoking upon the confeſſion of our continued correſpondence. 

But, my dear, let the articles be drawn up, and ingroſſed; and ſolemnize upon them; and there's no more to be ſaid. 

Let me add, that the ſailor fellow has been tampering with my Kitty, and offered a bribe, to find where to direct to you. Next time he comes, I will have him drawn through one of our deepeſt fiſh-ponds, if I can get nothing out of him. His attempt to corrupt a ſervant of mine will juſtify my orders. 

I ſend this away directly. But will follow it by another; which ſhall have for its ſubject only my Mother, Myſelf, and your uncle Antony. And as your proſpects are more promiſing than they have been, I will endeavour to make you ſmile upon this occaſion. For you will be pleaſed to know, that my mamma has had a formal tender from that grey gooſe; which may make her ſkill uſeful to herſelf, were ſhe to encourage it. 

May your proſpects be ſtill more and more happy, prays 

Your ownANNA HOWE.LETTER XXIII. MiſsHOWE,To MiſsCLARISSA HARLOWE.
Sat. Sunday, May20, 21.NOW, my dear, for the promiſed ſubject. You muſt not aſk me, how I came by theoriginals(ſuch they really are) that I am going to preſent you with: For my mamma would not read to me thoſeparts of your uncle's letter, which bore hard upon myſelf, and which leave him without any title to mercy from me: Nor would ſhe let me hear but what ſhe pleaſed of hers in anſwer; for ſhe has condeſcended to anſwer him; with a denial, however:—But ſuch a denial, as no-one but anold batchelorwould take from a widow. 

Any-body, except myſelf, who could have been acquainted with ſuch a fal-lal courtſhip as this muſt have been had it proceeded, would have been glad it had gone on; and I dare ſay, but for the ſaucy daughter, it had. My mamma, in that caſe, would have been ten years the younger for it, perhaps: And could I but have approved of it, I ſhould have been conſidered as if ten years older than I am: Since, very likely, it would then have been:'We widows, my dear, know not how to keep men at a diſtance—So as to give them pain, in order to try their love.—You muſt adviſe me, child: You muſt teach me to be cruel—Yet nottoocruel neither.—So as to make a man heartleſs, who has no time, God wot, to throw away.'Then would my behaviour to Mr. Hickman have been better liked; and my mother would have bridled like her daughter! 

O my dear, how we might have been diverted, by the practiſings for recovery of theLong-forgottens!could I have been ſure that it would have been in my power to have put them aſunder, in the Iriſh ſtile,before they had come together.But there's no truſting to a widow whoſe goods and chattels are in her own hands, addreſſed by an old batchelor, who has fine things, and offers to leave her ten thouſand pounds better than he found her, and ſole miſtreſs beſides, of all herNotables!for theſe, as you'll ſee by-and-by, are his propoſals. 

The old Triton's addreſs carries the writer's marks upon the very ſuperſcription—To the equally amiable, and worthily admired[There's for you]Mrs.ANNABELLAHOWE,widow; the laſt word added, I ſuppoſe, asEſquireto a man; or for fear thebellatoAnna,ſhould not enough diſtinguiſh the perſon meant from the ſpinſter [Vain huſſey you'll call me, I know]: And then follows:—Theſe humbly preſent.—Put down as a memorandum, I preſume, to make a leg, and behave handſomely at preſenting it; he intending very probably to deliver it himſelf. 

And now ſtand by—To ſee 

Enter OLD NEPTUNE. 

His head adorned with ſea-weed, and a crown of cockle-ſhells, as we ſee him decked out in Mrs. Robinſon's ridiculous grotto. 

Monday, May15.Madam,I Did make a ſort of reſolution ten years ago, never to marry. I ſaw in other families, where they livedbeſt,you'll be pleaſed to mark that,queerneſſesI could not away with. Then, liked well enough to live ſingle for ſake of my brother's family; and for one child in it, more than the reſt. But that girl has turned us all off of the hinges: And why I ſhould deny myſelf any comforts for them as will not thank me for ſo doing, I don't know. 

So much for my motives, as from ſelf and family: But the dear Mrs. Howe makes me go further. 

I have a very great fortune, I bleſs God for it, all of my own getting, ormoſtof it; you'll be pleaſed to mark that; for I was the younger brother of three. You have alſo, God be thanked, a great eſtate, which you have improved by your own frugality and wiſe management. Frugality, let me ſtop to ſay, is one of the greateſt virtues in this mortal life, becauſe it enables us to do juſtice toall,and puts it in our power to benefitſomeby it, as we ſee theydeſerve. 

You have but one child; and I am a batchelor, and have never a one.—All batchelors cannot ſay ſo: Wherefore your daughter may be the better for me,if ſhe will keep up with my humour; which was never thought bad: Eſpecially to my equals. Servants, indeed, I don't matter being angry with, when I pleaſe: They are paid for bearing it, and too-too often deſerve it; as we have very frequently taken notice of to one another. But this won't hurt neither you nor Miſs. 

I will make very advantageous ſettlements; ſuch as any common friend ſhall judge to be ſo. But muſt have all in my own power, while I live: Becauſe, you know, Madam, it is as creditable to the wife, as the huſband, that it ſhould be ſo. 

I aim not at fine words. We are not children; tho' it is hoped we may have ſome; for I am a very healthy ſound man, I bleſs God for it: And never brought home from my voyages and travels, a worſer conſtitution than I took out with me. I was none of thoſe, I will aſſure you. But this I will undertake, that if you are the ſurvivreſs, you ſhall be atthe leaſtten thouſand pounds the better for me: What, in the contrary caſe, I ſhall be the better for you, I leave to you, as you ſhall think my kindneſs to you ſhall deſerve. 

But one thing, Madam, I ſhould be glad of, that Miſs Howe might not live with us then (She need not know I write thus)—But go home to Mr. Hickman, as ſhe is upon the point of marriage, I hear. And if ſhe behaves dutifully, as ſhe ſhould do, to us both, ſhe ſhall be the better; for ſo I ſaid before. 

You ſhall manage all things, both mine and your own; for I know little of land-matters. All my oppoſition to you ſhall be out of love, when I think you take too much upon you for your health. 

It will be very pretty for you, I ſhould think, to have a man of experience, in a long winter's evening, to ſit down and tell you ſtories of foreign parts, and the cuſtoms of the nations he has conſorted with. And I have fine curioſities of the Indian growth; ſuch asladies love, and ſome that even my niece Clary, when ſhe was good, never ſaw. Theſe, one by one, as you are kind to me (which I make no queſtion of, becauſe I ſhall be kind to you) ſhall all be yours.—Prettier entertainment by much, than ſitting with a too ſmartiſh daughter, ſometimes out of humour, and thwarting, and vexing, as daughters will, when women-grown eſpecially (as I have heard you often obſerve); and thinking their parents old, without paying them the reverence due to years; when, as in your caſe, I make no ſort of doubt, they are young enough to wipe their noſes. You underſtand me, Madam. 

As for me myſelf, it will be very happy, and I am delighted with the thinking of it, to have, after a pleaſant ride, or ſo, a lady of like experience with myſelf, to come home to, and but one intereſt betwixt us: To reckon up our comings-in together; and what this day and this week has produced:—O how this will increaſe love!—Moſt mightily will it increaſe it!—And I believe I ſhould never love you enough or be able to ſhew you all my love. 

I hope, Madam, there need not beſuchmaide•niceties and hangings-off, as I may call them, between us, for hanging-off ſake, as that you will deny me line or two to this propoſal, written down, altho' yo•would not anſwer me ſo readily when I ſpoke to you Your daughter being, I ſuppoſe, hard by; for yo•looked round you, as if not willing to be overheard▪So I reſolved to write: That my writing may ſtand as upon record, for my upright meaning; being no•of your Lovelaces; you'll mark that, Madam; but•downright, true, honeſt, faithful Engliſhman. So hop•you will not diſdain to write a line or two to this my propoſal: And I ſhall look upon it as a great honou•, I will aſſure you, and be proud thereof.—What can ſay more?—For you are your own miſtreſs, as I a•my own maſter: And you ſhallalwaysbe your ow•miſtreſs: Be pleaſed to mark that; for ſo a lady of your prudence and experience ought to be. 

This is a long letter. But the ſubject requires it; becauſe I would not write twice where once would do: So would explain my ſenſe and meaning at one time. 

I have had writing in my head,two whole months very near; but hardly knew how, being unpractiſed in theſe matters, to begin to write. And now, good lady, be favourable to 

Your moſt humble Lover, and obedient Servant,ANT. HARLOWE.Here's a letter of courtſhip, my dear!—And let me ſubjoin to it, that if now, or hereafter, I ſhould treat this hideous lover, who is ſo free with me to my mother, with aſperity, and you ſhould be diſguſted at it; I ſhall think you don't give me that preference in your love, which you have in mine. 

And now, which ſhall I firſt give you; the anſwer of my mamma; or, the dialogue that paſſed between the widow-mother and the pert daughter, upon her letting the latter know that ſhe had a letter? 

Ithinkyou ſhall have thedialogue.But let me premiſe one thing; that if youthinkme too free, you muſt not let it run in your head, that I am writing ofyouruncle, or ofmymother: But of a couple of old lovers, no matter whom. Reverence is too apt to be forgotten by ſecond perſons, where theReverendsforgetfirſt. 

Well then, ſuppoſe my mamma, after twice comeing into my cloſet to me, and as often going out, with very meaning features, and lips ready to burſt open, but ſtill cloſed, as it were by compulſion, a ſpeech going off, in a ſlight cough, that never went near the lungs; grown more reſolute, the third time of entrance, and ſitting down by me, thus begin. 

Mother.I have a very ſerious matter to talk with you upon, Nancy, when you are diſpoſed to attend to matterswithinourſelves, and not let matterswithoutourſelves, wholly engroſs you. 

A goodſelves-iſh ſpeech!—But I thought that friendſhip, and gratitude, and humanity, were matters that ought to be deemed of the moſtintimateconcern to us. But not to dwell upon her words: 

Daughter.I amnowdiſpoſed to attend to every thing my mamma isdiſpoſedto ſay to me. 

M.Why then, child.—Why then, my dear—[And the good lady's face lookedſoplump!ſoſmooth! andſoſhining!]—I ſee you are all attention, Nancy!—But don't be ſurpriſed!—Don't be uneaſy!—But I have—I have—Where is it?—[And yet it lay next her heart, never another near it.—So no difficulty to have found it.]—I have aletter,my dear!—[And out from her boſom it came: But ſhe ſtill held it in her hand.]—I have aletter,child.—It is—It is—It is from—from a gentleman, I aſſure you!—lifting up her head, and ſmiling. 

There is no delight to a daughter, thought I, in ſuch ſurprizes, as ſeem to becollecting:I will deprive my mamma of the ſatisfaction of making agradualdiſcovery. 

D.From Mr. Antony Harlowe, I ſuppoſe, Madam? 

M.[Lips drawn cloſer: Eye raiſed] Why, my dear!—But how, I wonder, could you think of Mr. Antony Harlowe? 

D.How, Madam, could I think of any-bodyelſe? 

M.How could you think of any-bodyelſe!—angrily, and drawing back her face; but do you know the ſubject, Nancy? 

D.You have told it, Madam, by your manner of breaking it to me. But, indeed, I queſtioned not,that he hadtwomotives in his viſits here—Bothequally agreeable to me; for all that family love me dearly. 

M.No love loſt, if ſo, between you and them. But this [Riſing] is what I get—So like your papa!—I never could open my heart tohim! 

D.Dear Madam, excuſe me. Be ſo good as to open your heart tome.—I don't love the Harlowes. But pray excuſe me. 

M.You have put me quite out with your forward temper!—[Angrily ſitting down again]. 

D.I will be all patience and attention. May I be allowed to read his letter? 

M.I wanted toadviſewith you upon it.—But you are ſuch a ſtrange creature!—You are always for anſwering one, before one ſpeaks! 

D.You'll be ſo good as to forgive me, Madam.—But I thought every-body (he among the reſt) knew, that you had always declared againſt a ſecond marriage. 

M.And ſo I have. But then it was in the mind I was in. Things may offer— 

I ſtared. 

M.Nay, don't be ſurpriſed!—I don't intend—I don't intend— 

D.Not, perhaps, inthe mind you are in,Madam. 

M.Pert creature!—Riſing again!—We ſhall quarrel, I ſee!—There's no— 

D.Once more, dear Madam, I beg your excuſe. I will attend in ſilence.—Pray, Madam, ſit down again.—Pray do.—[She ſat down]—May I ſee the letter? 

No; there are ſome things in it, you won't like.—Your temper is known, I find, to be unhappy.—But nothingbadagainſt you; intimations, on the contrary, that you ſhall be the better for him, if you oblige him. 

Not a living ſoul but the Harlowes, I ſaid, thought me ill-temper'd: And I was contented thattheyſhould, who could do as they had done by the moſt univerſally acknowleged ſweetneſs in the world. 

Here we broke out a little; but, at laſt, ſhe read me ſome of the paſſages in it.—But not themoſt mightilyridiculous; yet I could hardly keep my countenance neither. And when ſhe had done; 

M.Well now, Nancy, tell me what you think of it? 

D.Nay, pray, Madam, tell me whatyouthink of it? 

M.I expect to be anſwered by an anſwer; not by a queſtion!—You don'tuſeto be ſhy to ſpeak your mind. 

D.Not when my mamma commands me to do ſo. 

M.Then ſpeak it now. 

D.Without hearing it all? 

M.Speak to what youhaveheard. 

D.Why then, Madam—You won't be my mamma HOWE, if you give way to it. 

M.I am ſurpriſed at your aſſurance, Nancy! 

D.I mean, Madam, you will then be my mamma HARLOWE. 

M.Oh dear heart!—But I am not a fool.And her colour went and came.D.Dear, Madam!—(But, indeed, I don't love a Harlowe—that's what I meant). Iamyour child, andmuſtbe your child, do what you will. 

M.A very pert one, I am ſure, as ever mother bore! And youmuſtbe my child, do what Iwill!—As much as to ſay, you would not, if you could help it, if I— 

D.How could I have ſuch a thought!—It woul•beforward,indeed, if I had—when I don't kno•what yourmindis, as to the propoſal:—When the propoſal is ſo very advantageous a one too. 

M.[looking a little leſs diſcompoſed] Why, indeed, ten thouſand pounds— 

D.And to be ſure of outliving him, Madam! This ſtaggered her a little— 

M.Sure!Nobody can be ſure!—But it is very likely, that— 

D.Not at all, Madam; you was going to read ſomething (but ſtopt) about his conſtitution: His ſobriety is well known.—Why, Madam, theſe gentlemen who have been at ſea, and in different climates, and come home to relax from cares in a temperate one, and are ſober—are the likelieſt to live long of any men in the world.—Don't you ſee, that his very ſkin is a fortification of buff? 

M.Strange creature! 

D.God forbid, that any-body I love and honour, ſhouldmarry a man,in hopes tobury him.—But ſuppoſe, Madam, at your time of life— 

M.Mytime of life!—Dear heart!—What is my time of life, pray? 

M.Not old, Madam; and that may be your danger! 

As I hope to live (my dear) my mamma ſmiled, and looked not diſpleaſed with me. 

M.Why, indeed, child—Why, indeed, I muſt needs ſay—And then I ſhould chooſe to do nothing (froward as you are ſometimes) to hurtyou. 

D.Why, as to that, Madam—I can't expect you ſhould deprive yourſelf of any ſatisfaction— 

M.Satisfaction,my dear!—I don't ſay, it would be aſatisfaction.—But could I do any thing that would benefityou,it would perhaps be an inducement to holdoneconference upon the ſubject. 

D.My fortune already will be more conſiderable than my match, if I am to have Mr. Hickman. 

M.Why ſo?—Mr. Hickman's fortune is enough to intitle him to yours. 

D.Ifyouthink ſo, that's enough. 

M.Not but I ſhould think the worſe of myſelf, if I deſired any body's death; but I think, as you ſay,Mr. Antony Harlowe is a healthy man, and bids fair for a long life. 

Bleſs me, thought I, how ſhall I do to know whether this be an objection or a recommendation! 

D.Will you forgive me, Madam? 

M.What would the girl ſay.—Looking as if ſhe was half afraid to hear what. 

D.Only, that if you marry a man ofhistime of life, you ſtand two chances inſtead of one, to be a nurſe atyourtime of life. 

M.Saucebox! 

D.Dear Madam!—What I mean is only, that theſe healthy old men ſometimes fall into lingering diſorders all at once. And I humbly conceive, that the infirmities of age are too uneaſily borne with, where the remembrance of the pleaſanter ſeaſon comes not in to relieve the healthier of the two. 

M.A ſtrange girl!—I always told you, that you know either too much to be argued with, or too little for me to have patience with you. 

D.I can't but ſay, I would be glad of your commands, Madam, how to behave myſelf to Mr. Harlowe next time he comes. 

M.How to behave yourſelf!—Why, if you retire with contempt of him, when he next comes, it will be but as you have been uſed to do of late. 

D.Then heisto come again, Madam? 

M.And ſuppoſe he be? 

D.I can't help it, if it be your pleaſure, Madam.—He deſires a line in anſwer to his fine letter. If he comes, it will be in purſuance of that line, I preſume? 

M.None of your arch and pert leers, girl!—You know I won't bear them. I had a mind to hear wh•t you would ſay to this matter. I have not wrote; but I ſhall preſently. 

D.It is mighty good of you, Madam; I hope the man will think ſo; to anſwer his firſt application by letter.—Pityhe ſhould write twice, if once will do. 

M.That fetch won't let you into my intention, as to what I ſhall write: It is too ſaucily put. 

D.Perhaps I can gueſs at your intention, Madam, were it to become me ſo to do. 

M.Perhaps I would not make aMr. Hickmanof any gentleman; uſing him the worſe for reſpecting me. 

D.Nor, perhaps, would I, Madam, if Ilikedhis reſpects. 

M.I underſtand you. But, perhaps, it is inyourpower to make me hearken, or not, to Mr. Harlowe. 

D.Young gentlemen, who have probably a great deal of time before them, need not be in haſte for a wife. Mr. Hickman, poor man! muſt ſtay his time, or take his remedy. 

M.He bears more from you, than a manought. 

D.Then, I doubt, he gives areaſonfor the treatment he meets with. 

M.Provoking creature! 

D.I have but one requeſt to make you, Madam. 

M.Adutifulone, I ſuppoſe. What is it, pray? 

D.That ifyoumarry,Imay be permitted to live ſingle. 

M.Perverſe creature!—I am ſure. 

D.How can I expect, Madam, that you ſhould refuſe ſuch terms?Ten thouſand pounds!—At theleaſtten thouſand pounds!—A very handſome propoſal!—So many fine things too, to give you one by one! Deareſt Madam, forgive me!—I hope it is not yet ſo far gone, that raillyingthis manwill be thought want of duty toyou. 

M.Your raillying ofhim,and your reverence tome,it is plain, haveoneſource. 

D.I hope not, Madam. But ten thouſand pounds— 

M.Is no unhandſome propoſal. 

D.Indeed I think ſo. I hope, Madam, you will not be behindhand with him in generoſity. 

M.He won't be ten thouſand pounds the better for me, if he ſurvive me. 

D.No, Madam, he can't expect that, as you have a daughter, and as he is abatchelor, and has not a child—poor old ſoul! 

M.Old ſoul, Nancy!—And thus to call him for being a batchelor, and not having a child?—Does this become you? 

D.Not old ſoul for that, Madam.—But half the ſum; five thouſand pounds; you can't engage for leſs, Madam. 

M.That ſum has your approbation then?—Looking as if ſhe'd be even with me. 

D.As he leaves it to your generoſity, Madam, and as the reward of his kindneſs to you, it can't be leſs.—Do, dear Madam, permit me, without incurring your diſpleaſure, to call him poor old ſoul again. 

M.Never was ſuch a whimſical creature!—Turning away [for I believe, I looked very archly; a leaſt I intended to do ſo] to hide her involuntary ſmiling.—I hate that wicked ſly look. You give yourſelf very free airs—Don't you? 

D.I ſnatched her hand, and kiſs'd it—My dear mamma, be not angry with your girl!—You have told me, that you was very lively formerly. 

M.Formerly!Good lack!—But were I to encourage his propoſals, you may be ſure, that for Mr. Hickman's ſake, as well as yours, I ſhould make•wiſe agreement. 

D.You have both lived to years of prudence▪Madam. 

M.Yes, I ſuppoſe I am anold ſoultoo. 

D.He alſo is for making a wiſe agreement, o•hinting at one, at leaſt. 

M.Well, the ſhort and the long I ſuppoſe is this: I have not your conſent to marry? 

D.Indeed, Madam, you have not mywiſhesto marry. 

M.Let me tell you, that if prudence conſiſts in wiſhing well toone's ſelf,I ſee not but theyoung flirtsare as prudent as theold ſouls. 

D.Dear Madam, Would you blame me, if to wiſh you not to marry Mr. Antony Harlowe, is wiſhing wellto myſelf? 

M.You are mighty witty. I wiſh you were as dutiful. 

D.I am more dutiful, I hope, than witty; or I ſhould be a fool, as well as a ſaucebox. 

M.Letmejudge of both.—Parents are only to live for their children, let them deſerve it or not. That'stheirdutiful notion! 

D.Heaven forbid that I ſhould wiſh, if there be Two intereſts between my mamma and me, that my mamma poſtpone her own for mine! or give up any thing that would add to the real comforts of her life, to oblige me!—Tell me, my dear mamma, if you think this propoſal will? 

M.I ſay, That ten thouſand pounds is ſuch an ac•uiſition to one's family, that the offer of it deſerves•civil return. 

D.Not theoffer,Madam: Thechanceonly!—〈◊〉you have a view to an increaſe of family, the mo•ey may provide— 

M.You cannot keep within tolerable bounds!—That ſaucy fleer, I cannot away with— 

D.Deareſt, deareſt Madam, forgive me, butold•ulran in my head again!—Nay, indeed and upon•y word, I won't be robbed of that charming ſmile;•nd again I kiſſed her hand. 

M.Away, bold creature! Nothing can be ſo pro•oking, as to be made to ſmile, when one would•hooſe,andought,to be angry. 

D.But, dear Madam, if it be tobe,I preſume•ou won't think of it before next winter. 

M.What now would the pert one be at? 

D.Becauſe he only propoſes to entertain you withpretty ſtories of foreign nations in a winter's evening. Deareſt, deareſt Madam, let me have the reading of his letter thro'. I will forgive him all he ſays aboutme. 

M.It may be a very difficult thing perhaps, for a man of the beſt ſenſe to write a Love-letter, that may not be cavilled at. 

D.That's becauſe lovers, in their letters, hit not the medium:—They either write too much nonſenſe, or too little. But do you call thisoddſoul's letter (no more will I call himoldſoul, if I can help it) a Love-letter? 

M.Well, well, I ſee you are averſe to this matter. I am not to be yourmamma; you will live ſingle, if I marry. I had a mind to ſee if generoſity govern'd you in your views. I ſhall purſue my own inclinations; and if they ſhould happen to be ſuitable to yours, pray let me for the future be better rewarded by you, than hitherto I have been. 

And away ſhe flung, without ſtaying for a reply.—Vex'd, I dare ſay, that I did not better approve of the propoſal:—Were it only that the merit of denying might have been all her own, and to lay the ſtronger obligation upon her ſaucy daughter. 

She wrote ſuch a widow-like refuſal when ſhe went from me, as might not exclude hope in any other wooer; whatever it may do in Mr. Tony Harlowe. 

It will be my part, to take care to beat her off of the viſit ſhe half-promiſes to make him, upon condition of withdrawing his ſuit, as you will obſerve in hers: For who knows what effect the old batchelor's exotics (Far-fetched and dear-bought,you know, is〈◊〉proverb) might otherwiſe have upon a woman's mind, wanting nothing but unneceſſaries, gewgaw, an•fineries, and offered ſuch as are not eaſily to be me with, or purchaſed? 

Well, but now I give you leave to read here, in this place, the copy of my mother's anſwer to you•uncle's letter. Not one comment will I make upon it. I know my duty better. And here therefore, taking the liberty to hope, that I may, in your preſent leſs diſagreeable, if not wholly agreeable, ſituation, provoke a ſmile from you, I conclude myſelf, 

Your ever-affectionate and faithfulANNA HOWE.Mrs.ANNABELLA HOWE,ToANTONY HARLOWE,Eſq
Friday, May19.Mr. Antony Harlowe, SIR,IT is not uſual, I believe, for our Sex to anſwer by pen and ink, the firſt letter on theſe occaſions. Thefirſtletter!—How odd is that!—As if I expected another; which I do not.—But then, I think, as I do not judge proper to encourage your propoſal, there is no reaſon why I ſhould not anſwer in civility, where ſo great a civility is intended. Indeed I was always of opinion, that a perſon was intitled to That, and not to ill-uſage, becauſe he had a reſpect for me. And ſo I have often and often told my daughter. 

A woman, I think, makes but a poor figure in a man's eye afterwards, and does no reputation to her Sex neither, when ſhe behaves like a tyrant to him beforehand. 

To be ſure, Sir, if I were to change my condition, I know not a gentleman whoſe propoſal could be more agreeable. Your nephew and nieces have enough without you: My daughter is a fine fortune without me, and I ſhould take care to double it, living or dy•ng, were I to do ſuch a thing: So nobody need to be the worſe for it. But Nancy would not think ſo. 

All the comfort I know of in children, is, that when young they do with us what they will, and all•s pretty in them to their very faults; and when they are grown up, they think their parents muſt live forthem only; and deny themſelves every thing for their ſakes. I know Nancy could not bear a father-in-law. She would fly at the very thought of my being in earneſt to give her one. Not that I ſtand in fear of my daughter neither: It is not fit I ſhould. But ſhe has her poor papa's ſpirit: A very violent one, that was—And one would not chooſe, you know, Sir, to enter into any affair, that, one knows, one muſt renounce a daughter for, or ſhe a mother.—Except indeed one's heart were much in it;—which, I bleſs God, mine is not. 

I have now been a widow theſe ten years; nobody to controul me:—And I am ſaid not to bear controul: So, Sir, you and I are beſt as we are, I believe—nay, I am ſure of it—For we want not what either has;—having both more than we know what to do with. And I know I could not be in the leaſt accountable for any of my ways. 

My daughter indeed, tho' ſhe is a fine girl, as girls go [She has too much ſenſe indeed for her ſex; and knows ſhe has it], is more a check to me than one would wiſh a daughter to be—For one would not be always ſnapping at each other: But ſhe will ſoon be married; and then, not living together, we ſhall only come together when we are pleaſed, and ſtay away when we are not; and ſo, like other lovers, never ſee any thing but the beſt ſides of each other. 

I own, for all this, that I love her dearly; and ſhe me, I dare ſay. So would not wiſh to provoke her to do otherwiſe. Beſides, the girl is ſo much regarded every-where, that having lived ſo much of my prime a widow, I would not lay myſelf open to her cenſures, or even to her indifference, you know. 

Your generous propoſal requires all this explicitneſs. I thank you for your good opinion of me. When I know you acquieſce with This my civil refuſal; and indeed, Sir, I am as much in earneſt in it, as if I had ſpoke broader; I don't know, but Nancyand I may, with your permiſſion, come to ſee your fine things; for I am a great admirer of rarities that come from abroad. 

So, Sir, let us only converſe occaſionally as we meet, as we uſed to do, without any other view to each other, than good wiſhes: Which I hope may not be leſſen'd for this declining. And then I ſhall always think myſelf 

Your obliged ſervant,ANNABELLA HOWE.I ſent word by Mrs. Lorimer, that I would write an anſwer: But would take time for conſideration. So hope, Sir, you won't think it a ſlight, I did not write ſooner. 

LETTER XXIV. Mr.LOVELACE,ToJOHN BELFORD,Eſq
Sunday, May21.I AM too much diſturbed in my mind, to think of any think but revenge; or I had intended to give thee an account of Miſs Harlowe's curious obſervations on the play.Miſs Harlowe's,I ſay. Thou knoweſt that I hate the name ofHarlowe; and I am exceedingly out of humour with her, and with her ſaucy friend. 

What's the matternow,thou'lt aſk?—Matter enough; for while we were at the play, Dorcas, who had her orders, and a key to her lady's chamber, as well as a maſter-key to her drawers and mahogany cheſt, cloſet-key and all, found means to come at ſome of Miſs Howe's laſt-written letters. The vigilant wench was directed to them by ſeeing her lady take a letter out of her ſtays, and put it to the others, before ſhe went out with me—Afraid, as the women upbraidingly tell me, that I ſhould find it there. 

Dorcas no ſooner found them, than ſhe aſſembled three ready writers of thenon-apparents,and Sally, and ſhe and they employed themſelves with the utmoſt diligence, in making extracts, according to former directions, from theſe curſed letters, for my uſe.Curſed,I may well call them—Such abuſes, ſuch virulence! O this little fury Miſs Howe!—Well might her ſaucy friend (who has been equally free with me, or the occaſion could not have been given) be ſo violent as ſhe lately was, at my endeavouring to come at one of theſe letters. 

I was ſure, that this fair-one, at ſo early an age, with a conſtitution ſo firm, health ſo blooming, eyes ſo ſparkling, could not be abſolutely, and from her own vigilance, ſo guarded and ſo apprehenſive, as I have found her to be.—Sparkling eyes, Jack, when the poetical tribe have ſaid all they can for them, are an infallible ſign of a rogue, or room for a rogue, in the heart. 

Thou may'ſt go on with thy preachments, and Lord M. with his Wiſdom of nations, I am now more aſſured of her than ever. And now my revenge is up, and join'd with my love, all reſiſtance muſt fall before it. And moſt ſolemnly do I ſwear, that Miſs Howe ſhall come in for her ſnack. 

And here, juſt now, is another letter brought from the ſame little virulent devil.—I hope to procure tranſcripts from that too, very ſpeedily, if it be put to the reſt; for the ſaucy lady is reſolved to go to church this morning; not ſo much from a ſpirit of devotion, I have reaſon to think, as to try whether ſhe can go out without check or controul, or my attendance. 

I HAVE been denied breakfaſting with her. Indeed ſhe was a little diſpleaſed with me laſt night; becauſe, on our return from the play, I obliged her to paſs the reſt of the night with the women and me, in their parlour, and to ſtay till near One. She toldme at parting, that ſhe expected to have the whole next day to herſelf.—I had not read the extracts then; ſo was all affectionate reſpect, awe, and diſtance; for I had reſolved to begin a new courſe, and, if poſſible, to baniſh all jealouſy and ſuſpicion from her heart: And yet I had no reaſon to be much troubled at her paſt ſuſpicions; ſince, if a woman will continue with a man whom ſhe ſuſpects, when ſhe can get from him, orthinksſhe can, I am ſure it is a very hopeful ſign. 

SHE is gone. Slipt down before I was aware. She had ordered a chair, on purpoſe to exclude my perſonal attendance. But I had taken proper precautions. Will. attended her by conſent; Peter, the houſe-ſervant, was within Will.'s call. 

I had, by Dorcas, repreſented her danger from Singleton, in order to diſſuade her from going at all, unleſs ſhe allowed me to attend her; but I was anſwer'd, That if there was no cauſe of fear at the playhouſe, when there were buttwoplayhouſes, ſurely there was leſs at church, when there were ſomanychurches. The chairmen were ordered to carry her to St. James's church. 

But ſhe would not be ſo careleſs of obliging me, if ſhe knew what I have already come at, and how the women urge me on; for they are continually complaining of the reſtraint they lie under; in their behaviour; in their attendance; neglecting all their concerns in the front-houſe; and keeping this elegant back one intirely free from company, that ſhe may have no ſuſpicion of them. They doubt not my generoſity, they ſay: Butwhyfor my own ſake, in Lord M.'s ſtyle,ſhould I make ſo long a harveſt of ſo little corn?—Women, ye reaſon well. I think I will begin my operations the moment ſhe comes in. 

I HAVE come at the letter brought her from Miſs Howe to-day.—Plot, conjuration, ſorcery, witchcraft, all going forward!—I ſhall not be able to ſee thisMiſs Harlowewith patience. As the nymphs below ſay, Why isnightneceſſary?—And Sally and Polly upbraidingly remind me of my firſt attempts upon themſelves.—Yet force anſwers not my end—And yet it may, if there be truth in that part of the libertines creed,That once ſubdued, is always ſubdued!And what woman anſwersaffirmativelyto the queſtion? 

SHE is returned—But refuſes to admit me. Deſires to have the day to herſelf. Dorcas tells me, that ſhe believes her denial is from motives of piety—Oons, Jack, is there impiety in ſeeing me!—Would it not be the higheſt act of piety, to reclaim me? And is this to be done by her refuſing to ſee me, when ſhe is in a devouter frame than uſual? But I hate her, hate her heartily!—She is old, ugly, and deformed.—But O the blaſphemy!—Yet ſhe is an Harlowe—And I hate her for that. 

But ſince I muſt not ſee her [She will be miſtreſs of herown will,and of hertimetruly!], let me fill up mine, by telling thee what I have come at. 

The firſt letter the women met with, is dated April 27See Vol.III.Letterlxii.p.297.. Where can ſhe have put the preceding ones? It mentions Mr. Hickman as a buſy fellow between them. Hickman had beſt take care of himſelf. She ſays in it,I hope you have no cauſe to repent returning my Norris—It is forthcoming on demand.Now, what the devil can this mean!—Her Norris forthcoming on demand!—The devil take me, if I amout-Norris'd!—If ſuch innocents can allow themſelves to plot, toNorris,well may I. 

She is ſorry, thather Hannah can't be with her.—And what if ſhe could?—What could Hannah do for her in ſuch a houſe as this? 

The women in the houſe are to be found out in one breakfaſting.The women are enraged at both the correſpondents for this; and more than ever make a point of conquering her. I had a good mind to give them Miſs Howe in full property. Say but the word, Jack, and it ſhall be done. 

She is glad that Miſs Harlowe had thoughts of takeing me at my word. She wondered I did not offer again.Adviſes her, if I don't ſoon,not to ſtay with me.Cautions herto keep me at diſtance; not to permit the leaſt familiarity—See, Jack—See Belford—Exactly as I thought!—Her vigilance all owing to a cool friend; who can ſit down quietly, and give that advice, which, in her own caſe, ſhe could not take.—She tells her,it is my intereſt to be honeſt—INTEREST, fools!—I thought theſe girls knew, that myintereſtwas ever ſubſervient to mypleaſure. 

What would I give to come at the copies of the letters to which thoſe of Miſs Howe are anſwers! 

The next letter is dated May 3See Vol.III.Letterlxix.p.332.. In this the little termagant expreſſes her aſtoniſhment, that her mother ſhould write to Miſs Harlowe, to forbid her to correſpond with her daughter. Mr. Hickman, ſhe ſays, is of opinion,that ſhe ought not to obey her mother.How the creeping fellow trims between both! I am afraid, that I muſt puniſh him, as well as this virago; and I have a ſcheme rumbling in my head, that wants but half an hour's muſing to bring into form, that will do my buſineſs upon both. I cannot bear, that the parental authority ſhould be thus deſpiſed, thus trampled under-foot—But obſerve the vixen,'Tis well he is of her opinion; for her mother having ſet her up, ſhe muſt have ſomebody to quarrel with.—Could a Lovelace have allowed himſelf a greater licence? Thisgirl's a deviliſh rake in her heart. Had ſhe been a man, and one of us, ſhe'd have outdone us all in enterprize and ſpirit. 

She wants but very little farther provocation,ſhe ſays,to fly privately to London. And if ſhe does, ſhe will not leave her till ſhe ſees her either honourably married, or quit of the wretch.Here, Jack, the tranſcriber Sally has added a prayer—'For the Lord's ſake, dear Mr. Lovelace, get this fury to London!'—Her fate, I can tell thee, Jack, if we had her among us, ſhould not be ſo long deciding as her friend's. What a gantlope would ſhe run, when I had done with her, among a dozen of her own pityleſs Sex, whom my charmer ſhall never ſee!—But more of this anon. 

I find by this letter, that my ſaucy captive had been drawing the characters of every varlet of ye. Nor am I ſpared in it more than you.The man's a fool, to be ſure, my dear.Let me die, if they either of them find me one.A ſilly fellow, at leaſt.Curſed contemptible!—I ſee not but they are a ſet of infernals—There's for thee, Belford—and he the Beelzebub.There's for thee, Lovelace!—And yet ſhe would have her friend marry a Beelzebub.—And what have any of us done, to the knowlege of Miſs Harlowe, that ſhe ſhould give ſuch an account of us, as ſhould warrant ſo much abuſe from Miſs Howe?—But that's to come! 

She blames her, fornot admitting Miſs Partington to her bed—Watchful as you are, what could have happen'd?—If violence were intended, he would not ſtay for the night.Sally writes upon this hint—'See, Sir, what is expected from you. An hundred and an hundred times have we told you of this.'—And ſo they have. But, to be ſure, the advice from them was not of half the efficacy as it will be from Miſs Howe.—You might have ſat up after her, or not gone to bed.But can there be ſuch apprehenſions between them, yet the one adviſe her to ſtay, and the otherreſolve to wait my imperial motion for marriage? I am glad I know that. 

She approves of my propoſal about Mrs. Fretchville's houſe. She puts her upon expecting ſettlements; upon naming a day: And concludes, with inſiſting upon her writing, notwithſtanding her mother's prohibition; or bids hertake the conſequence.Undutiful wretches! 

Thou wilt ſay to thyſelf, by this time, And can this proud and inſolent girl be the ſame Miſs Howe, who ſighed for honeſt Sir George Colmar; and who, but for this her beloved friend, would have followed him in all his broken fortunes, when he was obliged to quit the kingdom? 

Yes, ſhe is the very ſame. And I always found in others, as well as in myſelf, that a firſt paſſion thoroughly ſubdued, made the conqueror of it a rover; the conquereſs a tyrant. 

Well, but now, comes mincing in a letter from one who hasthe honour of dear Miſs Howe's commandsSee Vol.III.Letterlxxi.p.337., to acquaint Miſs Harlowe, that Miſs Howe isexceſſively concerned for the concern ſhe has given her. 

I have great temptations, on this occaſion,ſays the prim Gothamite,to expreſs my own reſentments upon your preſent ſtate. 

My own reſentments!—And why did he not fall into thistemptation?—Why, truly, becauſe he knew not what that ſtate was, which gave him ſotemptinga ſubject—Only by conjecture,and ſo forth. 

He then dances in his ſtyle, as he does in his gaite! To be ſure, to be ſure, he muſt have made the grand tour, and come home by the way of Tipperary. 

And being moreover forbid,ſays the prancer,to enter into the cruel ſubject—This prohibition was a mercy to thee, friend Hickman!—But whycruel ſubject,if thou knoweſt not what it is, butconjectureſtonly from the diſturbance it gives to a girl, that is hermother's diſturbance, will be thy diſturbance, and the diſturbance, in turn, of every-body with whom ſhe is intimately acquainted, unleſs I have the humbling of her? 

In another letterLetteriv.p.19.of this Vol.,She approves of her deſign to leave me, if ſhe can be received by her friends. 

Has heard ſome ſtrange ſtories of me, that ſhew me to be the worſt of men. Had I a dozen lives, I might have forfeited them all twenty crimes ago.—An odd way of reckoning, Jack! 

Miſs Betterton, Miſs Lockyer, are named—The man(ſo ſhe irreverently calls me!), ſhe ſays,is a villain.Let me periſh if I am called a villain for nothing!—Shewill have her uncle(as Miſs Harlowe deſires)ſounded about receiving her. Dorcas is to be attach'd to her intereſt: My letters are to be come at by ſurprize or trick—See, Jack! 

She is alarmed at my attempt to come at a letter of hers. 

Were I to come at the knowlege of her freedoms with my character,ſhe ſays,ſhe ſhould be afraid to ſtir out without a guard.—I would adviſe the vixen to get her guard ready. 

I am at the head of a gang of wretches[Thee, Jack, and thy brother varlets, ſhe owns ſhe means],who join together to betray innocent creatures, and to ſupport one another in their villainies.—What ſayeſt thou to this, Belford? 

She wonders not at her melancholy reflections for meeting me, for being forced upon me, and tricked by me.—I hope, Jack, thou'lt have done preaching after this! 

But ſhe comforts her,that ſhe will be both a warning and example to all her Sex.—I hope the Sex will thank me for this. 

The nymphs had not time, they ſay, to tranſcribe all that was worthy of my reſentment in this letter—So I muſt find an opportunity to come at it myſelf. Noble rant, they ſay, it contains.—But I am aſeducer,and a hundred vile fellows, in it—And the devil,it ſeems,took poſſeſſion of my heart, and of the hearts of all her friends, in the ſame dark hour, in order to provoke her to meet me.Again,There is a fate in her error,ſhe ſays—Why then ſhould ſhe grieve?—Adverſity is her ſhining-time,and I cannot tell what—Yet never to thank the man to whom ſhe owes theſhine! 

In the nextLetterx.p.37., Wicked as I am,ſhe fears I muſt be her lord and maſter.—I hope ſo. 

She retracts what ſhe ſaid againſt me in her laſt.—My behaviour to my Roſebud; Miſs Harlowe to take poſſeſſion of Mrs. Fretchville's houſe; I to ſtay at Mrs. Sinclair's; the ſtake I have in my country; my reverſions; my oeconomy; my perſon; my addreſs; all are brought in my favour, to induce her nownotto leave me. How do I love to puzzle theſelong-ſighted girls! 

Yetmy teazing ways,it ſeems,are intolerable.—Are women only to teaze, I trow?—The Sex may thank themſelves for learning me to out-teaze them. So the headſtrong Charles XII. of Sweden learned the Czar Peter to beat him, by continuing a war with the Muſcovites againſt the antient maxims of his kingdom. 

May eternal vengeancePURSUEthe villain[Thank heaven, ſhe does not ſayovertake], if he give room to doubt his honour!—Women can't ſwear, Jack—Sweet ſouls! they can only curſe. 

I am ſaid,to doubt her love.—Have I not reaſon? And ſhe,to doubt my ardor?—Ardor, Jack!—Why, 'tis very right—Women, as Miſs Howe ſays, and as every Rake knows, love ardors! 

She apprizes her of theill ſucceſs of the application made to her uncle.—By Hickman, no doubt!—I muſthave this fellow's ears in my pocket, very quickly, believe. 

She ſays,She is equally ſhocked and enraged againſt all her family: Mrs. Norton's weight has been try'd upon Mrs. Harlowe, as well as Mr. Hickman's upon the uncle: But never were there,ſays the vixen,ſuch determin'd brutes in the world. Her uncle concludes her ruin'd already.—Is not that a call upon me, as well as a reproach?—They all expected applications from her when in diſtreſs—but were reſolved not to ſtir an inch to ſave her life.She wasaccuſed of premeditation and contrivance.Miſs Howe isconcerned,ſhe tells her,for the revenge my pride may put me upon taking for the diſtance ſhe has kept me at.—And well ſhe may.—She has now but one choice[for her couſin Morden, it ſeems, is ſet againſt her too],and that's to be mine.—An act of neceſſity, of convenience.—Thy friend, Jack, to be already made a woman's convenience!—Is this to be borne by a Lovelace? 

I ſhall make great uſe of this letter. From Miſs Howe's hints of what paſſed between her uncle Harlowe and Hickman [It muſt be Hickman], I can give room for myinventionto play; for ſhe tells her, thatſhe will not reveal all.I muſt endeavour to come at this letter myſelf; I muſt have the very words; extracts will not do. This letter, when I have it, muſt be my compaſs to ſteer by. 

The fire of friendſhip then blazes out and crackles. I never before imagin'd, that ſo fervent a friendſhip could ſubſiſt between two ſiſter-beauties, both toaſts. But even here it may be inflamed by oppoſition, and by that contradiction which gives ſpirit to female ſpirits of a warm and romantic turn. 

She raves aboutcoming up, if by ſo doing ſhe could prevent ſo noble a creature from ſtooping too low, or ſave her from ruin—One reed to ſupport another! Theſe girls are frenzical in their friendſhip. They know not what a ſteady fire is. 

How comes it to paſs, that I cannot help being pleaſed with this virago's ſpirit, tho' I ſuffer by it? Had I her but here, I'd engage in a week's time, to teach her ſubmiſſion without reſerve. What pleaſure ſhould I have in breaking ſuch a ſpirit! I ſhould wiſh for her but for one month, in all, I think. She would be too tame and ſpiritleſs for me after that. How ſweetly pretty to ſee the two lovely friends, when humbled and tame, both ſitting in the darkeſt corner of a room, arm in arm, weeping and ſobbing for each other!—And I their emperor, their thenacknowlegedemperor, reclined on a ſophee, in the ſame room, Grand Signor like, uncertain to which I ſhould firſt throw out my handkerchief? 

Mind the girl:She is enraged at the Harlowes:Sheis angry at her own mother; ſhe is exaſperated againſt her fooliſh and low-vanity'd Lovelace.—FOOLISH, a little toad! [God forgive me for calling a virtuous girl a toad!]Let us ſtoop to lift the wretch out of his dirt, tho' we ſoil our fingers in doing it! He has not been guilty of direct indecency to you.—It ſeemsextraordinaryto Miſs Howe that I have not.—Nor dare he—She ſhould be ſure of that. If women have ſuch things in their heads, why ſhould not I in my heart?—Not ſo much of a devil as that comes to neither. Such villainous intentions would have ſhewn themſelves before now, if I had them.—Lord help them!— 

She then puts her friend upon urging forſettlements, licence,and ſo forth.—No room for delicacy now,ſhe ſays.—And tells her what ſhe ſhall ſay, tobring all forward from me.—Doſt think, Jack, that I ſhould not have carried my point long ago, but for this vixen?—Shereproaches her for havingMODESTY'D-away,as ſhe calls it,more than one opportunity, that ſhe ought not to have ſlipt.—Thus thou ſeeſt, that the nobleſt of the Sex mean nothing in the world by their ſhyneſs and diſtance, but to pound a poor fellow, whom they diſlike not, when he comes into their pur•ieus. 

Annexed to this letter is a paper the moſt ſaucy that ever was wrote of a mother by a daughter. There are in it ſuch free reflections upon widows and batchelors, that I cannot but wonder how Miſs Howe came by her learning. Sir George Colmar, I can tell thee, was a greater fool than thy friend, if ſhe had it all for nothing. 

The contents of this paper acquaints Miſs Harlowe, that her uncle Antony has been making propoſals of marriage to her mother. The old fellow's heart ought to be a tough one, if he ſucceed, or ſhe who broke that of a much worthier man, the late Mr. Howe, will ſoon get rid of him. But be this as it may, the ſtupid family is more irreconcileable than ever to their goddeſs-daughter, for old Antony's thoughts of marrying: So I am more ſecure of her than ever; ſince, as Miſs Howe ſays,ſhe can have but one choice now.Though this diſguſts my pride, yet I believe, at laſt, my tender heart will be moved in her favour. For I did not wiſh, that ſhe ſhould have nothing but perſecution and diſtreſs.—But why loves ſhe thebrutes,as Miſs Howe juſtly calls them, ſo much; me ſo little?—But I have ſtill more unpardonable tranſcripts from other letters. 

LETTER XXV. Mr.LOVELACE,ToJOHN BELFORD,Eſq
THE next letter is of ſuch a nature, that, I dare ſay, theſe proud varleteſſes would not have had it fall into my hands for the worldLetterxv.p.69.. 

I ſee by it to what her diſpleaſure with me, in relation to my propoſals, was owing. They were not ſumm'd up, it ſeems, with the warmth, with theardor,which ſhe had expected. This whole letter was tranſcribed by Dorcas, to whoſe lot it fell. Thou ſhalt have copies of them all at full length ſhortly. 

Men of our caſt,this little devil ſays,ſhe fancies, cannot have the ardors that honeſt men have.Miſs Howe has very pretty fancies, Jack. Charming girl! Would to heaven I knew whether my fair-one anſwers her as freely as ſhe writes! 'Twould vex a man's heart, that this virago ſhould have come honeſtly by herfancies. 

Who knows but I may have half a dozen creatures to get off my hands, before I engage for life?—Yet, leſt this ſhould mean me a compliment, as if I would reform, ſhe adds her belief,that ſhe muſt not expect me to be honeſt on this ſide my grand climacteric.She has an high opinion of her Sex, to think they can charm ſo long, with a man ſo well acquainted with theiridenticalneſs. 

He to ſuggeſt delays,ſhe ſays,from a compliment to be made to Lord M.!—Yes,I,my dear—Becauſe a man has not been accuſtomed to be dutiful, muſt he never be dutiful?—In ſo important a caſe as this too; the hearts of his whole family engaged in it?You did indeed,ſays ſhe,want an interpoſing friend—But were I to have been in your ſituation, I would have tore his eyes out, and left it to his own heart to furniſh the reaſon for it.See! See! What ſayeſt thou to this, Jack? 

Villain—Fellow that he is!follow. And for what? Only for wiſhing that the next day were to be my happy one; and for being dutiful to my neareſt relation. 

It is the cru•lleſt of fates,ſhe ſays,for a woman to be forced to have a man whom her heart deſpiſes.—That is what I wanted to be ſure of.—I was afraid, that my beloved was too conſcious of her talents; of her ſuperiority!—I was afraid that ſheindeeddeſpiſed me; and I cannot bear it. But, Belford, I do not intend that this lady ſhall be bound down by ſo cruel a fate. Let me periſh, if I marry a woman who has given her moſt intimate friend reaſon to ſay, ſhe deſpiſes me!—A Lovelace to be deſpiſed, Jack! 

His clench'd fiſt to his forehead on your leaving him in juſt diſpleaſure—that is, when ſhe was not ſatiſfied with my ardors, and pleaſe ye!—I remember the motion: But her back was toward me at the time. Are theſe watchful ladies all eye?—But obſerve her wiſh,I wiſh it had been a poll-ax, and in the hands of his worſt enemy.—Iwillhave patience, Jack; Iwillhave patience! My day is at hand.—Then will I ſteel my heart with theſe remembrances. 

But here is a ſcheme to be thought of, in order toget my fair prize out of my hands, in caſe I give her reaſon to ſuſpect me. 

This indeed alarms me. Now the contention becomes arduous. Now wilt thou not wonder, if I let looſe my plotting genius upon them both. I will not beout-Norris'd,Belford. 

But once more,ſhe has no notion,ſhe ſays,that I can or dare to mean her diſhonour.Butthen the man is a fool—that's all.—I ſhould indeed be a fool, to proceed as I do, and mean matrimony!However, ſince you are thrown upon a fool,ſays ſhe,marry the fool, at the firſt opportunity; and tho' I doubt that this man will be the moſt unmanageable of fools, as all witty and vain fools are, take him as a puniſhment, ſince you cannot as a reward.—Is there any bearing this, Belford? 

But in the letter I came at to-day, while ſhe was at church, her ſcheme is further opened, and a curſed one it is. 

Mr. Lovelace then tranſcribes, from his ſhort-hand notes, that part of Miſs Howe's letter, which relates to the deſign of engaging Mrs. Townſend (in caſe of neceſſity) to give her protection till Colonel Morden comesLetterxxii.p.103.: And repeats his vows of revenge; eſpecially for thoſe words;that ſhould he attempt any thing that would make him obnoxious to the laws of ſociety, ſhe might have a fair riddance of him, either by flight or the gallows; no matter which. 

He then adds;—'Tis my pride, to ſubdue girls who knowtoo muchtodoubttheir knowlege; and to convince them, that they knowtoo little,to defend themſelves from the inconveniencies of knowingtoo much. 

How paſſion drives a man on! I have written, as thou'lt ſee, a prodigious quantity in a very few hours! Now my reſentments are warm, I will ſee, and perhaps will puniſh, this proud, thisdouble-arm'd beauty. I have ſent to tell her, that I muſt be admitted to ſup with her. We have neither of us dined: She refuſed to drink tea in the afternoon.—And I believe neither of us will have much ſtomach to our ſupper. 

LETTER XXVI. MiſsCLARISSA HARLOWE,To MiſsHOWE.
Sunday morning,7,May21.I Was at the play laſt night with Mr. Lovelace and Miſs Horton. It is, you know, a deep and moſt affecting tragedy in the reading. You have my remarks upon it, in the little book you made me write upon the principal acting plays. You will not wonder, that Miſs Horton, as well as I, was greatly moved at the repreſentation, when I tell you, and have ſome pleaſure in telling you, that Mr. Lovelace himſelf was very ſenſibly touched with ſome of the moſt affecting ſcenes. I mention this in praiſe of the author's performance; for I take Mr. Lovelace to be one of the moſt hard-hearted men in the world. Upon my word, my dear, I do. 

His behaviour, however, on this occaſion, and on our return, was unexceptionable, only that he would oblige me to ſtay to ſupper with the women be•ow, when we came back, and to ſit up with him•nd them till near one o'clock this morning. I was reſolved to be even with him; and indeed I am notvery ſorry to have the pretence; for I love to paſs the Sundays by myſelf. 

To have the better excuſe to avoid his teazing, I am ready dreſſed to go to church this morning. I will go only to St. James's church, and in achair; that I may be ſure I can go out and come in when I pleaſe, without being obtruded upon by him, as I was twice before. 

Near nine o'clock.I HAVE your kind letter of yeſterday. He knows I have. And I ſhall expect, that he will be inquiſitive next time I ſee him after your opinion of his propoſals. I doubted not your approbation of them, and had written an anſwer on that preſumption; which is ready for him. He muſt ſtudy for occaſions of procraſtination, and to diſoblige me, if now any thing happens to ſet us at variance again. 

He is very importunate to ſee me; he has deſired to attend me to church. He is angry, that I have declined to breakfaſt with him. I was ſure that I ſhould not be at my own liberty, if I had.—I bid Dorcas tell him, that I deſired to have this day to myſelf; I would ſee him in the morning, as early as he pleaſed. She ſays, ſhe knows not what ails him, but that he is out of humour with every-body. 

He has ſent again, in a peremptory manner. He warns me of Singleton. But ſurely, I ſent him word, if he was not afraid of Singleton at the play-houſe laſt night, I need not at church to day: So many churches to one play-houſe.—I have accepted of his ſervant's propoſed attendance.—But he is quite diſpleaſed, it ſeems. I don't care. I will not be perpetually at his inſolent beck.—Adieu, my dear, til•I return. The chair waits. He won't ſtop me, ſure as I go down to it. 

I DID not ſee him as I went down. He is, i•ſeems, exceſſively out of humour. Dorcas ſays, N•with me neither, ſhe believes: But ſomething has vex'd him. This is put on, perhaps, to make me dine with him. But I won't, if I can help it. I ſhan't get rid of him for the reſt of the day, if I do. 

HE was very earneſt to dine with me. But I was reſolved to carry this one ſmall point; and ſo denied to dine myſelf. And indeed I was endeavouring to write to my couſin Morden; and had begun three different letters, without being able to pleaſe myſelf; ſo uncertain and ſo unpleaſing is my ſituation. 

He was very buſy in writing, Dorcas ſays, and purſued it without dining, becauſe I denied him my company. 

He afterwardsdemanded,as I may ſay, to be admitted to afternoon tea with me: And appealed by Dorcas to his behaviour to me laſt night; as if, as I ſent him word by her, he thought he had a merit in being unexceptionable. However, I repeated my promiſe to meet him as early as he pleaſed in the morning, or to breakfaſt with him. 

Dorcas ſays, he raved. I heard him loud, and I heard his ſervant fly from him, as I thought. You, my deareſt friend, ſay, in one of yoursVol.III.Letterlxix.p.332., that you muſt have ſomebody to be angry at, when your mother ſets you up.—I ſhould be very loth to draw compariſons.—But the workings of paſſion, when indulg'd, are but too much alike, whether in man or woman. 

HE has juſt ſent me word, that he inſiſts upon ſupping with me. As we had been in a good train for ſeveral days paſt, I thought it not prudent to break with him, for little matters. Yet, to be, in a manner, threaten'd into his will, I know not how to bear that. 

WHILE I was conſidering, he came up, and, tapping at my door, told me, in a very angry tone, he muſt ſeeme this night. He could not reſt, till he had been told what he had done to deſerve this treatment. 

I muſt go to him. Yet perhaps he has nothing new to ſay to me.—I ſhall be very angry with him. 

As the Lady could not know what Mr. Lovelace's deſigns were, nor the cauſe of his ill humour, it will not be improper to purſue the ſubject from his letter. 

Having deſcribed his angry manner of demanding, in perſon, her company at ſupper; he proceeds as follows. 

 

'Tis hard, anſwered the fair Perverſe, that I am to be ſo little my own miſtreſs. I will meet you in the dining-room half an hour hence. 

I went down to wait that half-hour. All the women ſet me hard to give her cauſe for this tyranny. They demonſtrated, as well from the nature of theſex,as of thecaſe,that I had nothing to hope for from my tameneſs, and could meet with no worſe treatment, were I to be guilty of the laſt offence. They urged me vehemently totryat leaſt what effect ſome greater familiarities, than I had ever uſed with her, would have: And their arguments being ſtrengthened by my juſt reſentments on the diſcoveries I had made, I was reſolved to take ſome liberties, and, as they were received, to take ſtill greater, and lay all the fault upon her tyranny. In this humour I went up, and never had paralytic ſo little command of his joints, as I had, as I walked about the dining-room, attending her motions. 

With an erect mien ſhe enter'd, her face averted, her lovely boſom ſwelling, and the more charmingly protuberant for the erectneſs of her mien. O Jack! that ſullenneſs and reſerve ſhould give this haughty maid new charms! But in every attitude, in every humour, in every geſture, is beauty beautiful.—By her averted face, and indignant aſpect, I ſaw the dear inſolent wasdiſpoſed to be angry—But by the fierceneſs of mine, as my trembling hands ſeized hers, I ſoon made fear her predominant paſſion. And yet the moment I beheld her, my heart was daſtardiz'd, damp'd, and reverenced-over. Surely this is an angel, Jack!—And yet, had ſhe not been known to be a female, they would not frombabyhoodhave dreſſed her as ſuch, nor would ſhe, but upon that conviction, have continued the dreſs. 

Let me aſk you, Madam, I beſeech you tell me, what I have done to deſerve this diſtant treatment? 

And let me aſk you, Mr. Lovelace, why are my retirements to be thus invaded?—What can you have to ſay to me ſince laſt night, that I went with you ſo much againſt my will to the play? And after ſitting up with you, equally againſt my will, till a very late hour?— 

This I have to ſay, Madam, that I cannot bear to be kept at this diſtance from you under the ſame roof. I have a thouſand things to ſay, to talk of, relating to our preſent and future proſpects; but when I want•o open my whole ſoul to you, you are always con•riving to keep me at a diſtance; you make me inconſiſtent with myſelf; your heart is ſet upon delays; you muſt have views that you will not own. Tell me, Madam, I conjure you to tell me, this moment, without ſubterfuge or reſerve, in what light am I to appear to you in future? I cannot bear this diſtance;•he ſuſpenſe you hold me in I cannot bear. 

In what light, Mr. Lovelace? In no bad light, I hope.—Pray, Mr. Lovelace, do not graſp my hands•o hard [endeavouring to withdraw her hands]. Pray•et me go— 

You hate me, Madam— 

I hate nobody, Sir— 

Youhateme, Madam, repeated I. 

Inſtigated and reſolved, as I came up, I wanted•ome new provocation. The devil indeed, as ſoon asmy angel made her appearance, crept out of my heart; but he had left the door open, and was no farther off than my elbow. 

You come up in no good temper, I ſee, Mr. Lovelace—But pray be not violent—I have done you no hurt—Pray be not violent— 

Sweet creature! And I claſped one arm about her, holding one hand in my other—You have done me no hurt!—You have done me the greateſt hurt!—In what have I deſerved the diſtance you keep me at?—I knew not what to ſay. 

She ſtruggled to diſengage herſelf—Pray, Mr. Lovelace, let me withdraw. I know not why this is—I know not what I have done to offend you. I ſee you are come with a deſign to quarrel with me. If you would not terrify me by the ill-humour you are in, permit me to withdraw. I will hear all you have to ſay another time—To-morrow morning, as I ſent you word; but indeed you frighten me.—I beſeech you, if you have any value for me, permit me to withdraw. 

Night,mid-night,isneceſſary, Belford. Surprize, terror,muſtbe neceſſary to the ultimate trial of this charming creature, ſay the women below what they will—I could not hold my purpoſes—This was no•the firſt time that I hadintendedto try if ſhe could forgive. 

I kiſſed her hand with a fervor, as if I would hav•left my lips upon it—Withdraw then, deareſt an•ever-dear creature—Indeed I enter'd in a very•humour: I cannot bear the diſtance you ſo cauſle•keep me at—Withdraw, however, Madam, ſince•is your will to withdraw; and judge me generouſly judge me but as I deſerve to be judged; and let m•hope to meet you to-morrow morning early, in ſuc•a temper as becomes our preſent ſituation, and m•future hopes. And ſo ſaying, I conducted her to th•door, and left her there. But inſtead of going dow•to the women, went into my own chamber, and locked myſelf in; aſhamed of being awed by her ma•eſtic lovelineſs and apprehenſive virtue, into ſo great a change of purpoſe, notwithſtanding I had ſuch juſt provocations from the letters of her ſaucy friend, founded on her own repreſentations of facts and ſituations between herſelf and me. 

The Lady thus deſcribes her terrors, and Mr. Lovelace's behaviour, on this occaſion. 

 

On my entering the dining-room, he took my hands in his, in ſuch a humour, as I ſaw plainly he was reſolved to quarrel with me.—And for what?—•never in my life beheld in any-body ſuch a wild, ſuch an angry, ſuch an impatient ſpirit. I was ter•ified; and inſtead of being as angry as I intended to•e, I was forced to be all mildneſs. I can hardly remember what were his firſt words, I was ſo frighted. But,You hate me, Madam! You hate me, Madam!were ſome of them—with ſuch a fierceneſs—I wiſh'd myſelf a thouſand miles diſtant from him. I hate no•ody, ſaid I; I thank God I hate no-body—You ter•ify me, Mr. Lovelace—Let me leave you.—The man, my dear, looked quite ugly—I never ſaw a man•ook ſo ugly, as paſſion made him look.—And for what?—And he ſo graſped my hands—fierce creature! He ſo graſped my hands! In ſhort, he•eemed by his looks, and by his words (once putting•is arms about me), to wiſh me to provoke him.—So that I had nothing to do, but to beg of him, which•did repeatedly, to permit me to withdraw; and to promiſe to meet him at his own time in the morning. 

It was with a very ill grace, that he complied, on•hat condition; and at parting he kiſſed my hand with•uch a ſavageneſs, that a redneſs remains upon it•till. 

Perfect for me, my deareſt Miſs Howe, perfect for me, I beſeech you, your kind ſcheme with Mrs.Townſend.—And I will then leave this man. See you not how from ſtep to ſtep, he grows upon me?—I tremble to look back upon his incroachments. And now to give me cauſe to apprehend more evil from him, than indignation will permit me to expreſs!—O my dear, perfect your ſcheme, and let me fly from ſo ſtrange a wretch! He muſt certainly have views in quarrelling with me thus, which he dare not own! Yet what can they be? 

I WAS ſo diſguſted with him, as well as frighted by him, that, on my return to my chamber, in a fit of paſſionate deſpair, I tore almoſt in two, the anſwer I had written to his propoſals. 

I will ſee him in the morning, becauſe I promiſed I would. But I will go out, and that without him, or any attendant. If he account not tolerably for his ſudden change of behaviour, and a proper opportunity offer of a private lodging in ſome creditable houſe, I will not any more return to this:—At preſent I think ſo.—And there will I either attend the perfecting of your ſcheme; or, by your epiſtolary mediation, make my own terms with the wretch; ſince it is your opinion, that I muſt be his, and cannot help myſelf. Or, perhaps take a reſolution to throw myſelf at once into Lady Betty's protection; and this will hinder him from making his inſolently-threatned viſit to Harlowe-Place. 

The Lady writes again on Monday evening; and gives her friend an account of all that has paſſed between herſelf and Mr. Lovelace that day; and of her being terrified out of her purpoſe of going abroad: But Mr. Lovelace's next letters giving a more ample account of all, hers are omitted. 

It is proper, however, to mention, that ſhe reurges Miſs Howe (from the diſſatisfaction ſhe has reaſon for from what paſſed between Mr. Lovelaceand herſelf) to perfect her ſcheme in relation to Mrs. Townſend. 

She concludes this letter in theſe words: 

'I ſhould ſay ſomething of your laſt favour (but a few hours ago received), and of your dialogue with your mother.—Are you not very whimſical, my dear?—I have but two things to wiſh for on this occaſion. The one, that your charming pleaſantry had a better ſubject, than that you find for it in this dialogue. The other, that my ſituation were not ſuch, as muſt too often damp that pleaſantry, and will not permit me to enjoy it, as I uſed to do. Be, however, happy in yourſelf, tho' you cannot in 

'YourCLARISSA HARLOWE.'LETTER XXVII. Mr.LOVELACE,ToJOHN BELFORD,Eſq
Monday Morn. May22.NO generoſity in this lady. None at all. Wouldſt thou not have thought, that after I had permitted her to withdraw, primed for miſchief as I was, that ſhe would meet me next morning early; and that with a ſmile; making me one of her beſt courteſies? 

I was in the dining-room before ſix, expecting her. She opened not her door. I went up-ſtairs and down, and hemm'd, and called Will. called Dorcas: Threw the doors hard to; but ſtill ſhe opened not her door. Thus till half an hour after eight, fooled I away my time; and then, breakfaſt ready, I ſent Dorcas to requeſt her company. 

But I was aſtoniſhed, when, following the wench at the firſt invitation, I ſaw her enter dreſſed, all but her gloves, and thoſe and her fan in her hand; in theſame moment, bidding Dorcas direct Will. to get her a chair to the door. 

Cruel creature, thought I, to expoſe me thus to the deriſion of the women below! 

Going abroad, Madam? 

I am, Sir. 

I looked curſed ſilly, I am ſure.—You will breakfaſt firſt, I hope, Madam, in a very humble ſtrain: Yet with an hundred tenter-hooks in my heart. 

Had ſhe given me more notice of her intention, I had perhaps wrought myſelf up to the frame I was in the day before, and begun my vengeance. And immediately came into my head all the virulence that had been tranſcribed for me from Miſs Howe's letters, and in that I had tranſcribed myſelf. 

Yes, ſhe would drink one diſh; and then laid her gloves and fan in the window juſt by. 

I was perfectly diſconcerted. I hemm'd and haw'd, and was going to ſpeak ſeveral times; but knew not in what key. Who's modeſt now, thought I! Who's inſolent now!—How a tyrant of a woman confounds a baſhful man!—She was my Miſs Howe, I thought; and I the ſpiritleſs Hickman. 

At laſt, Iwillbegin, thought I. 

She a diſh—I a diſh. 

Sip, her eyes her own, ſhe; like an haughty and imperious ſovereign, conſcious of dignity, every look a favour. 

Sip, like her vaſſal, I; lips and hands trembling, and not knowing that I ſipp'd or taſted. 

I was—I was—Iffp'd—drawing in my breath and the liquor together, tho' I ſcalded my mouth with it—I was in hopes, Madam— 

Dorcas came in juſt then.—Dorcas, ſaid ſhe, is a chair gone for? 

Damn'd impertinence, thought I, putting me out of my ſpeech! And I was forced to wait for the ſervant's anſwer to the inſolent miſtreſs's queſtion. 

William is gone for one, Madam. 

This coſt me a minute's ſilence before I could begin again.—And then it was with my hopes, and my hopes, and my hopes, that I ſhould have been early admitted to— 

What weather is it, Dorcas? ſaid ſhe, as regardleſs of me, as if I had not been preſent. 

A little lowering, Madam—The ſun is gone in—It was very fine half an hour ago. 

I had no patience—Up I roſe. Down went the tea-cup, ſaucer and all.—Confound the weather, the ſunſhine, and the wench!—Begone for a devil, when I am ſpeaking to your lady, and have ſo little opportunity given me. 

Up roſe the lady, half frighted; and ſnatched from the window her gloves and fan. 

You muſt not go, Madam!—By my ſoul, you muſt not—Taking her hand. 

Muſt not,Sir!—But I muſt—You can curſe your maid in my abſence, as well as if I were preſent—Except—Except—you intend forme,what you direct toher. 

Deareſt creature, you muſt not go!—You muſt not leave me!—Such determined ſcorn! Such contempts!—Queſtions aſk'd your ſervant of no meaning but to break in upon me; who could-bear it? 

Detain me not, ſtruggling.—I will not be withh•ld.—I like you not, nor your ways.—You ſought to quarrel with me yeſterday, for no reaſon in the world that I can think of, but becauſe I was too obliging. You are an ingrateful man; and I hate you with my whole heart, Mr. Lovelace! 

Do not make me deſperate, Madam.—Permit me to ſay, that you ſhall not leave me in this humour. Where-ever you go, I will attend you.—Had Miſs Howe been my friend, I had not been thus treated.—It is but too plain to whom my difficulties are owing. I have long obſerved, that every letter you receivefrom her, makes an alteration in your behaviour to me. She would haveyoutreatme,asſhetreats Mr. Hickman, I ſuppoſe: But neither does that treatment become your admirable temper to offer, nor me to receive. 

This ſtartled her. She did not care to have me think hardly of Miſs Howe. 

But recollecting herſelf, Miſs Howe, ſaid ſhe, is a friend to virtue, and to good men.—If ſhe like not you, it is becauſe you are not one of thoſe. 

Yes, Madam; and therefore, to ſpeak of Mr. Hickman and Myſelf, as you both, I ſuppoſe, think of each, ſhe treatshimas ſhe would not treat aLovelace.—I challenge you, Madam, to ſhew me but one of the many letters you have received from her, where I am mentioned. 

Whither will this lead us? replied ſhe. Miſs Howe is juſt; Miſs Howe is good.—She writes, ſhe ſpeaks, of every-body as they deſerve. If you point me out but any one occaſion, upon which you have reaſon to build a merit to yourſelf, as either juſt or good, or even generous, I will look out for her letter on that occaſion (if it be one I have acquainted her with); and will engage it ſhall be in your favour. 

Deviliſh ſevere! And as indelicate as ſevere, to put a modeſt man upon hunting backward after his own merits. 

She would have flung from me: Iwillgo out, Mr. Lovelace. I willnotbe detained. 

Indeed you muſt not, Madam, in this humour. And I placed myſelf between her and the door.—And then ſhe threw herſelf into a chair, fanning herſelf, her ſweet face all crimſoned over with paſſion. 

I caſt myſelf at her feet.—Begone, Mr. Lovelace, ſaid ſhe, with a rejecting motion, her fan in her hand; for your own ſake leave me!—My ſoul is above thee, man! With both her hands puſhing me from her!—Urge me not to tell thee, how ſincerely I think my ſoul above thee!—Thou haſt a proud, a too proudheart, to contend with!—Leave me, and leave me for ever!—Thou haſt a proud heart to contend with! 

Her air, her manner, her voice, were bewitchingly noble, tho' her words were ſo ſevere. 

Let me worſhip an angel, ſaid I, no woman. Forgive me, deareſt creature!—Creature if you be, forgive me!—Forgive my inadvertencies! Forgive my inequalities!—Pity my infirmity!—Who is equal to my Clariſſa? 

I trembled between admiration and love; and wrapt my arms about her knees, as ſhe ſat. She try'd to riſe at the moment; but my claſping round her thus ardently, drew her down again; and never was woman more affrighted. But free as my claſping emotion might appear to her apprehenſive heart, I had not, at the inſtant, any thought but what reverence inſpired. And till ſhe had actually withdrawn (which I permitted under promiſe of a ſpeedy return, and on her conſent to diſmiſs the chair), all the motions of my heart were as pure as her own. 

She kept not her word. An hour I waited, before I ſent to claim her promiſe. She could not poſſibly ſee me yet, was the anſwer. As ſoon as ſhe could, ſhe would. 

Dorcas ſays, ſhe ſtill exceſſively trembled; and ordered her to give her water and hartſhorn. 

A ſtrange apprehenſive creature!—Her terror is too great for the occaſion.—Evils in apprehenſion are often greater than evils in reality. Haſt thou never obſerved, that the terrors of a bird caught, and actually in the hand, bear no compariſon to what we might have ſuppoſed thoſe terrors would be, were we to have formed a judgment of the ſame bird by its ſhyneſs before taken? 

Dear creature!—Did ſhe never romp? Did ſhe never from girlhood to now, hoyden? Theinnocentkinds of freedom taken and all owed on theſe occaſions, would have familiarized her to greater. Sacrilegebut to touch the hem of her garment!—Exceſs of delicacy!—O the conſecrated beauty!—How can ſhe think to be a wife! 

But how do I know till I try, whether ſhe may not by a leſs alarming treatment be prevailed upon, or whether [Day, I have done with thee!] ſhe may not yield to nightly ſurprizes? This is ſtill the burden of my ſong, I can marry her when I will. And if I do, after prevailing (whether by ſurprize or reluctant conſent) whom but myſelf ſhall I have injured? 

IT is now eleven o'clock. She will ſee me as ſoon as ſhe can, ſhe tells Polly Horton, who made her a tender viſit, and to whom ſhe is leſs reſerved than to any-body elſe. Her emotion, ſhe aſſures her, was not owing to perverſeneſs, to nicety, to ill-humour; but toweakneſs of heart.She has notſtrength of mindſufficient, ſhe ſays, to enable her to ſupport her condition, and her apprehenſions, under the weight of a father's curſe; which ſhe fears is more than beginning to operate. 

Yet what a contradiction!—Weakneſs of heart,ſays ſhe, with ſuch aſtrength of will!—O Belford! ſhe is a lion-hearted lady, in every caſe where her honour, her punctilio rather, calls for ſpirit. But I have had reaſon more than once in her caſe, to conclude, that the paſſions of the gentleſt, ſlower to be moved than thoſe of the quick, are the moſt flaming, the moſt irreſiſtible, when raiſed.—Yet her charming body is not equally organized. The unequal partners pull two ways; and the divinity within her tears her ſilken frame. But had the ſame ſoul informed a maſculine body, never would there have been a truer hero. 

Monday, two o'clock.MY beloved not yet viſible. She is not well. Whatexpectationshad ſhe from my ardent admirationof her!—More rudeneſs than revenge apprehended. Yet, how my ſoul thirſts for revenge upon both theſe ladies!—I muſt have recourſe to my maſterſtrokes. This curſed project of Miſs Howe and her Mrs. Townſend, if I cannot contrive to render it abortive, will be always a ſword hanging over my head. Upon every little diſobligation my beloved will be for taking wing; and the pains I have taken, to deprive her of every other refuge or protection, in order to make her abſolutely dependent upon me, will be all thrown away. But, perhaps, I ſhall find out a Smuggler to counteract Miſs Howe. 

Thou remembreſt the contention between the Sun and the North wind, in the fable; which ſhould firſt make an honeſt Traveller throw off his cloak. 

Boreas began firſt. He puffed away moſt vehemently; and often made the poor fellow curve and ſtagger: But with no other effect, than to cauſe him to wrap his ſurtout the cloſer about him. 

But when it came to Phoebus's turn, he ſo played upon the traveller with his beams, that he made him firſt unbutton, and then throw it quite off:—Nor left he, till he obliged him to take to the friendly ſhade of a ſpreading beech; where proſtrating himſelf on the thrown-off cloak, he took a comfortable nap. 

The victor-god then laughed outright, both at Boreas and the Traveller, and purſued his radiant courſe, ſhining upon, and warming and cheriſhing a thouſand new objects, as he danced along: And at night, when he put up his fiery courſers, he diverted his Thetis with the relation of his pranks in the paſſed day. 

I, in like manner, will diſcard all my boiſtrous inventions; and if I can oblige my ſweet Traveller to throw aſide, but for one moment, the cloak of her rigid virtue, I ſhall have nothing to do, but, like the Sun, to bleſs new objects with my rays.—But my choſen hours of converſation and repoſe, after all my peregrinations, will be devoted to my goddeſs. 

AND now, Belford, according to my new ſyſtem, I think this houſe of Mrs. Fretchville an embaraſs upon me. I will get rid of it; for ſome time at leaſt. Mennell, when I am out, ſhall come to her, inquiring for me. What for? thou'lt ask. What for!—Haſt thou not heard what has befallen poor Mrs. Fretchville?—Then I'll tell thee. 

One of her maids, about a week ago, was taken with the ſmall-pox. The reſt-kept their miſtreſs ignorant of it till Friday; andthenſhe came to know it by accident.—The greater half of the plagues poor mortals of condition are tormented with, proceed from the ſervants they take, partly for ſhew, partly for uſe, and with a view to leſſen their cares. 

This has ſo terrified the widow, that ſhe is taken with all the ſymptoms which threaten an attack from that dreadful enemy of fair faces.—So muſt not think of removing: Yet cannot expect, that we ſhould be further delayed on her account. 

She now wiſhes, with all her heart, that ſhe had known her own mind, and gone into the country at firſt when I treated about the houſe: This evil then had not happened!—A curſed croſs accident forus,too!—High-ho! Nothing elſe, I think, in this mortal life!—People need not ſtudy to bring croſſes upon themſelves by their petulancies. 

So this affair of the houſe will be over; at leaſt, for one while. But then I can fall upon an expedient which will make amends for this diſappointment. Since I muſt moveſlow,in order to beſure,I have a charming contrivance or two in my head—Even ſuppoſing ſhe ſhould get away, to bring her back again. 

But what is become of Lord M. I trow, that he writes not to me, in anſwer to my invitation? If he would ſend me ſuch a letter, as I could ſhew, it might go a great way towards a perfect reconciliation. I have written to Charlotte about it. He ſhall ſoonhear from me, and that in a way he won't like, if he writes not quickly. He has ſometimes threatened to diſinheritme:But if I ſhould renouncehim,it would be but juſtice, and would vex him ten times more, than any thing he can do, will vex me. Then, the ſettlements unavoidably delayed, by his neglect!—How ſhall I bear ſuch a life of procraſtination! I, who, as to my will, and impatience, and ſo forth, am of the truelady-make!and can as little bear controul and diſappointment as the beſt of them! 

ANOTHER letter from Miſs Howe. I ſuppoſe it isthatwhich ſhe promiſes in her laſt to ſend her, relateing to the courtſhip between old Tony the uncle, and Annabella the mother. I ſhould be extremely rejoiced to ſee it. No more of the ſmuggler-plot in it, I hope. This, it ſeems, ſhe has put in her pocket. But I hope I ſhall ſoon find it depoſited with the reſt. 

Monday evening.AT my repeated requeſt ſhe condeſcended to meet me in the dining-room to afternoon tea, and not before. 

She entered with baſhfulneſs, as I thought; in a pretty confuſion, for having carried her apprehenſions too far. Sullen and ſlow moved ſhe towards the teatable.—Dorcas preſent, buſy in tea cup preparations. I took her reluctant hand, and preſſed it to my lips.—Deareſt, lovelieſt of creatures, why this diſtance? Why this diſpleaſure?—How can you thus torture the faithfulleſt heart in the world?—She diſengaged her hand. Again I would have ſnatch'd it. 

Be quiet, peeviſhly withdrawing it; and down ſhe ſat; a gentle palpitation in the beauty of beauties indicating mingled ſullenneſs and reſentment; her ſnowy handkerchief riſing and falling, and a ſweet fluſh overſpreading her charming cheeks. 

For God's ſake, Madam!—And a third time I would have taken her repulſing hand. 

And for the ſame ſake, Sir; no more teazing. 

Dorcas retired; I drew my chair nearer hers, and with the moſt reſpectful tenderneſs took her hand; and told her, that I could not, without the utmoſt concern, forbear to expreſs my apprehenſions (from the diſtance ſhe was ſo deſirous to keep me at), that if any man in the world was moreindifferentto her, to uſe no harſher a word, than another, it was the unhappy wretch before her. 

She looked ſteadily upon me for a moment, and with her other hand, not withdrawing that I held, pulled her handkerchief out of her pocket; and by a twinkling motion, tried to diſſipate a tear or two, which ſtood ready in each eye, to meander themſelves a paſſage down her glowing cheeks; but anſwered me only with a ſigh, and an averted face. 

I urged her to ſpeak; to look up at me; to bleſs me with an eye more favourable. 

I had reaſon, ſhe told me, for my complaint of her indifference. She ſaw nothing in my mind that was generous. I was not a man to be obliged or favoured. My ſtrange behaviour to her ſince Saturday night, for no cauſe at all that ſhe knew of, convinced her of this. Whatever hopes ſhe had conceived of me, were utterly diſſipated: All my ways were diſguſtful to her. 

This cut me to the heart. The guilty, I believe, in every caſe, leſs patiently bear the detecting truth, than the innocent do the degrading falſhood. 

I beſpoke her patience, while I took the liberty to account for this change, on my part.—I re-acknowleged the pride of my heart, which could not bear the thought of that want of preference in the heart of a lady, whom I hoped to call mine, which ſhe had always manifeſted. Marriage, I ſaid, was a ſtate thatwas not to be entered upon with indifference on either ſide. 

It is inſolence, interrupted ſhe, it is preſumption, Sir, to expect tokens of value, without reſolving todeſervethem. You have no whining creature before you, Mr. Lovelace, overcome by weak motives, to love where there is no merit. Miſs Howe can tell you, Sir, that I never loved thefaultsof my friend; nor ever wiſhed her to love me for mine. It was a rule with us, not to ſpare each other. And would a man who has nothing but faults (for pray, Sir, what are your virtues?) expect that I ſhould ſhew a value for him? Indeed, if I did, I ſhould not deſerve evenhisvalue, but ought to be deſpiſed by him. 

Well have you, Madam, kept up to this noble manner of thinking. You are in no danger of being deſpiſed for any marks of tenderneſs or favour ſhewn to the man before you. You have been perhaps,you'llthink,laudablyſtudious of making and taking occaſions to declare, that it was far from being owing to your choice, that you had any thoughts of me. My whole ſoul, Madam, in all its errors, in all its wiſhes, in all its views, had been laid open and naked before you, had I been encouraged by ſuch a ſhare in your confidence and eſteem, as would have ſecured me againſt your apprehended worſt conſtructions of what I ſhould from time to time have revealed to you, and conſulted you upon. For never was there a franker heart; nor a man ſo ready to accuſe himſelf. [This, Belford, is true]. But you know, Madam, how much otherwiſe it has been between us.—Doubt, diſtance, reſerve, on your part, begat doubt, fear, awe, on mine.—How little confidence! as if we apprehended each other to be a plotter rather than a lover. How have I dreaded every letter that has been brought you from Wilſon's!—And with reaſon; ſince the laſt,from which I expected ſo much, on account of th•propoſals I had made you in writing, has, if I may judge by the effects, and by your denial of ſeeing me yeſterday (tho' you could go abroad, and in achai•too, to avoid my attendance on you), ſet you againſt me more than ever. 

I was guilty, it ſeems, of going to church, ſaid the indignant charmer; and without the company of a man, whoſe choice it would not have been to go, had I not gone. I was guilty of deſiring to have the whole Sunday to myſelf, after I had obliged you, againſt my will, at a play; and after you had detained me, equally to my diſlike, to a very late hour over night.—Theſe were my faults: For theſe I was to be puniſhed; I was to be compelled to ſee you, and to be terrified when I did ſee you, by the moſt ſhocking ill-humour that was ever ſhewn to a creature in my circumſtances, and not bound to bear it. You have pretended to find free fault with my father's temper, Mr. Lovelace: But the worſt that he ever ſhewedaftermarriage, was not in the leaſt to be compared to what you have ſhewn twenty timesbeforehand.—And what are my proſpects with you, at the very beſt?—My indignation riſes againſt you, Mr. Lovelace, while I ſpeak to you, when I recollect the many inſtances, equally ungenerous and unpolite, of your behaviour to one whom you have brought into diſtreſs—And I can hardly bear you in my ſight. 

She turned from me, ſtanding up; and lifting up her folded hands and charming eyes, ſwimming in tears—O my dear papa, ſaid the inimitable creature, you might have ſpared your heavy curſe, had you known how I have been puniſhed, ever ſince my ſwerving feet led me out of your garden-doors to meet this man! Then, ſinking into her chair, a burſt of paſſionate tears forced their way down her glowing cheeks. 

My deareſt life, taking her ſtill folded hands in mine, who can bear an invocation ſo affecting, tho' ſo paſſionate? [And, as I hope to live, my noſe tingled, as I once when a boy, remember it did (and indeed once more very lately), juſt before ſome tears came into my eyes; and I durſt hardly truſt my face in view of hers] What have I done to deſerve this impatient exclamation?—Have I, at any time, by word, by deeds, by looks, given you cauſe to doubt my honour, my reverence, myadoration,I may call it, of your virtues?—All is owing to miſapprehenſion, I hope, on both ſides.—Condeſcend to clear up but your part, as I will mine, and all muſt ſpeedily be happy.—Would to heaven I loved that heaven as I love you! And yet, if I doubted a return in love, let me periſh if I ſhould know how to wiſh you mine!—Give me hope, deareſt creature, give me but hope, that I am your preferable choice!—Give me but hope, that you hate me not; that you do not deſpiſe me. 

O Mr. Lovelace, we have been long enough together, to be tired of each others humours and ways; ways and humours ſo different, that perhaps you ought to diſlikeme,as much as I doyou.—I think, I think, that I cannot make an anſwerable return to the value you profeſs for me. My temper is utterly ruined. You have given me an ill opinion of all mankind; of yourſelf in particular: And withal ſo bad a one of myſelf, that I ſhall never be able to look up, having utterly and for ever loſt all that ſelf-complacency, and conſcious pride, which are ſo neceſſary to carry a woman through this life with tolerable ſatisfaction to herſelf. 

She pauſed. I was ſilent. By my ſoul, thought I, this ſweet creature will at laſt undo me! 

She proceeded.—What now remains, but that you pronounce me free of all obligation to you? And that you will not hinder me from purſuing the deſtiny that ſhall be allotted me? 

Again ſhe pauſed. I was ſtill ſilent; meditating whether to renounce all further deſigns upon her; whether I had not received ſufficient evidence of a virtue, and of a greatneſs of ſoul, that could not be queſtioned, or impeached. 

She went on: Propitious to me be your ſilence, Mr. Lovelace!—Tell me, that I am free of all obligation to you. You know, I never madeyoupromiſes.—You know, that you are not under any tome.—My broken fortunes I matter not.— 

She was proceeding.—My deareſt life, ſaid I, I have been all this time, tho' you fill me with doubts of your favour, buſy in the nuptial preparations.—I am actually in treaty for equipage. 

Equipage,Sir!—Trappings, Tinſel!—What is Equipage; what is Life; what is Any-thing, to a creature ſunk ſo low, as I am in my own opinion!—Labouring under a father's curſe!—Unable to look backward without reproach, or forward without terror!—Theſe reflections ſtrengthen'd by every croſs accident!—And what but croſs accidents befal me!—All my darling ſchemes daſhed in pieces; all my hopes at an end; deny me not the liberty to refuge myſelf in ſome obſcure corner, where neither the enemies you have made me, nor the few friends you have left me, may ever hear of the ſuppoſed raſh one, till thoſe happy moments are at hand, which ſhall expiate for all! 

I had not a word to ſay for myſelf. Such a war in my mind had I never known. Gratitude, and admiration of the excellent creature before me, combating with villainous habit, with reſolutions ſo premeditately made, and with views ſo much gloried in!—An hundred new contrivances in my head, and in my heart, that, to be honeſt, as it is called; muſt all be given up, by a heart delighting in intrigue and difficulty—Miſs Howe's virulences endeavoured to be recollected—Yet recollection refuſing to bring them forward with the requiſite efficacy—I had certainlybeen a loſt man, had not Dorcas come ſeaſonably in, with a letter.—On the ſuperſcription written—Be pleaſed, Sir, to open it now. 

I returned to the window—opened it.—It was from herſelf.—Theſe the contents—'Be pleaſed to detain my lady; a paper of importance to tranſcribe.—I will cough when I have done.' 

I put the paper in my pocket, and turned to my charmer, leſs diſconcerted, as ſhe, by that time, had alſo a little recovered herſelf.—One favour, deareſt creature—Let me but know, whether Miſs Howe approves or diſapproves of my propoſals?—I know her to be my enemy. I was intending to account to you for the change of behaviour you accuſed me of at the beginning of this converſation; but was diverted from it by your vehemence.—Indeed, my beloved creature, you wasveryvehement.—Do you think, it muſt not be matter of high regret to me, to find my wiſhes ſo often delayed and poſtponed, in favour of your predominant view to a reconciliation with relations, who will not be reconciled to you?—To this was owing your declining to celebrate before we came to town, tho' you were ſo atrociouſly treated by your ſiſter, and your whole family; and tho' ſo ardently preſſed to celebrate by me? To this was owing the ready offence you took at my four friends; and at the unavailing attempt I made to ſee a dropt letter, little imagining that there could be room for mortal diſpleaſure on that account, from what two ſuch ladies could write to each other.—To this was owing the week's diſtance you held me at, till you knew the iſſue of another application.—But when they had rejected that; when you had ſent my coldly-received propoſals to Miſs Howe for her approbation or advice, as indeed I adviſed, and had honoured me with your company at the play on Saturday night (my whole behaviour unobjectible to the laſt hour); muſt not, Madam, the ſudden change in your conduct, the verynext morning, aſtoniſh and diſtreſs me?—And this perſiſted in with ſtill ſtronger declarations, after you had received the impatiently-expected letter from Miſs Howe; muſt I not conclude, that all was owing to her influence; and that ſome other application or project was meditating, that made it neceſſary to keep me again at diſtance till the reſult were known, and which was to deprive me of you for ever? for was not that your conſtantly propoſed preliminary?—Well, Madam, might I be wrought up to a half-frenzy by this apprehenſion; and well might I charge you with hating me.—And now, deareſt creature, let me know, I once more aſk you, what is Miſs Howe's opinion of my propoſals? 

Were I diſpoſed to debate with you, Mr. Lovelace, I could very eaſily anſwer your fine harangue. But at preſent, I ſhall only ſay, that your ways have been very unaccountable. You ſeem to me, if your meanings were always juſt, to have taken great pains to embaraſs them. Whether owing in you to the want of a clear head, or a ſound heart, I cannot determine; but it is to the want of one of them, I verily think, that I am to aſcribe the greateſt part of your ſtrange conduct. 

Curſe upon the heart of the little devil, ſaid I, who inſtigates you to think ſo hardly of the faithfulleſt heart in the world! 

How dare you, Sir?—And there ſhe ſtopt; having almoſt overſhot herſelf; as I deſigned ſhe ſhould. 

How dare Iwhat,Madam? And I looked with meaning. How dare Iwhat? 

Vile man!—And do you—And there again ſhe ſtopt. 

Do Iwhat,Madam?—And whyvile man? 

How dare you to curſeany-bodyin my preſence? 

O the ſweet receder!—But that was not to go off ſo with a Lovelace. 

Why then, deareſt creature, is thereany-bodythat inſtigates you?—If there be, again I curſe them, be they who they will. 

She was in a charming pretty paſſion.—And this was the firſt time that I had the odds in my favour. 

Well, Madam, it is juſt as I thought. And now I know how to account for a temper, that I hope is notnaturalto you. 

Artful wretch! And is it thus you would entrap me?—But know, Sir, that I receive letters from nobody but Miſs Howe. Miſs Howe likes ſome of your ways as little as I do; for I have ſet every-thing before her.—Yet ſhe is thus faryourenemy, as ſhe ismine:—She thinks I ſhould not refuſe your offers; but endeavour to make the beſt of my lot. And now you have the truth. Would to heaven you were capable of dealing with equal ſincerity! 

Iam,Madam. And here, on my knee, I renew my vows, and my ſupplication, that you will make me yours—Yours for ever.—And let me have cauſe to bleſs you and Miſs Howe in the ſame breath. 

To ſay the truth, Belford, I had before begun to think, that that vixen of a girl, who certainly likes not Hickman, was in love withme. 

Riſe, Sir, from your too-ready knees; and mock me not. 

Too-ready knees,thought I!—Tho' this humble poſture ſo little affects this proud beauty, ſhe knows not how much I have obtained of others of her ſex, nor how often I have been forgiven the laſt attempts, by kneeling. 

Mock you,Madam!—And I aroſe, and re-urged her for the day. I blamed myſelf at the ſame time, for my invitation to Lord M. as it might ſubject me to delay, from his infirmities: But told her, that I would write to him to excuſe me, if ſhe had no objection; or to give him the day ſhe would give me, and not wait for him, if he could not come in time. 

My day, Sir, ſaid ſhe, is never. Be not ſurprized▪A perſon of politeneſs judging between us, would not be ſurprized that I ſay ſo. But indeed, Mr. Lovelace, and wept thro' impatience, you either know not how to treat with a mind of the leaſt degree of delicacy, notwithſtanding your birth and education, or you are an ingrateful man; and (after a pauſe) a worſe than ingrateful one. But I will retire. I will ſee you again to-morrow. I cannot before. I think I hate you—You may look—Indeed I think I hate you. And if, upon a re-examination of my own heart, I find I do, I would not for the world that matters ſhould go on farther between us. 

I was too much vex'd, diſconcerted, mortify'd, to hinder her retiring—And yet ſhe had not gone, if Dorcas had not cough'd. 

The wench came in, as ſoon as her lady had retired, and gave me the copy ſhe had taken. And what ſhould it be of, but the anſwer the truly admirable creature had intended to give to my written propoſals in relation to ſettlements? 

I have but juſt dipt into this affecting paper. Were I to read it attentively, not a wink ſhould I ſleep this night. To-morrow it ſhall obtain my ſerious conſideration. 

LETTER XXVIII. Mr.LOVELACE,ToJOHN BELFORD,Eſq
Tueſday Morning, May23.THE dear creature deſires to be excuſed ſeeing me till evening. She is not very well, Dorcas tells me. 

Read here, if thou wilt, the paper tranſcribed by Dorcas. It is impoſſible that I ſhould proceed with my projects againſt this admirable woman, were it not that I am reſolved, after a few trials more, asnobly ſuſtained as thoſe ſhe has already paſſed through, to make her (if ſhe really hate me not) legally mine. 

To Mr.LOVELACE.
'WHEN a woman is married, that ſupreme earthly obligation requires her, in all inſtances of natural juſtice, and where her huſband's honour may be concerned, to yield her own will to his—But, beforehand, I could be glad, conformably to what I have always ſignified, to have the moſt explicit aſſurances, that every poſſible way ſhould be tried to avoid litigation with my father. Time and patience will ſubdue all things. My proſpects of happineſs are extremely contracted. A huſband's right will be always the ſame. In my life-time I could wiſh nothing to be done of this ſort. Your circumſtances, Sir, will not oblige you to extort violently from him what is in his hands. All that depends uponme,either with regard to my perſon, to my diverſions, or to the oeconomy that no married woman, of whatever rank or quality, ſhould be above inſpecting, ſhall be done, to prevent a neceſſity for ſuch meaſures being taken. And, if there will be noneceſſityfor them, it is to be hoped, that motivesleſsexcuſable will not have force—Motives which muſt be founded in a littleneſs of mind, which a woman, who hasnotthat littleneſs of mind, will be under ſuch temptations as her duty will hardly be able at all times to check, to deſpiſe her huſband for having; eſpecially in caſes where her own family, ſo much a part of herſelf, and which will have obligations upon her (tho' then butſecondaryones) from which ſhe never can be freed, are intimately concerned.' 

'This article, then, I urge to your moſt ſerious conſideration, as what lies next my heart. I enter not here minutely into the fatal miſunderſtanding between them and you: The fault may be in both. But, Sir,yourswas the foundation-fault: At leaſt,you gave a too plauſible pretence for my brother's antipathy to work upon. Condeſcenſion was no part of your ſtudy. You choſe to bear the imputations laid to your charge, rather than to make it your endeavour to obviate them.' 

'But this may lead into hateful recrimination—Let it be remembred, I will only ſay, in this place, that, intheireye, you have robbed them of a daughter they doted upon; and that their reſentments on this occaſion riſe but in proportion to their love, and their diſappointment. If they were faulty in ſome of the meaſures they took, while they themſelves did not think ſo, who ſhall judge forthem?You, Sir, who will judge every-body as you pleaſe, and will let no-body judge you, inyour ownparticular, muſt not be their judge.—It may therefore be expected, that they will ſtand out.' 

'As formyſelf,Sir, I muſt leave it (ſo ſeems it to be deſtined) to your juſtice, to treat me as you ſhall think I deſerve: But if your future behaviour tothemis not governed by that harſh-ſounding implacableneſs, which you charge upon ſome of their tempers, the ſplendor of your family, and the excellent character ofſomeof them (ofallindeed, except your own conſcience furniſhes you with oneonlyexception) will, on better conſideration, do every thing with them: For theymaybe overcome; perhaps, however, with the more difficulty, as the greatly proſperous leſs bear controul and diſappointment than others: For I will own to you, that I have often in ſecret lamented, that their great acquirements have been a ſnare to them; perhaps as great a ſnare, as ſomeotheraccidentals have been to you; which being leſs immediately your own gifts, you have ſtill leſs reaſon than they to value yourſelf upon them.' 

'Let me only, on this ſubject, further obſerve, that condeſcenſion is not meanneſs. There is a gloryin yielding, that hardly any violent ſpirit can judge of. My brother perhaps is no more ſenſible ofthisthan you. But as you have talents he has not (who, however, has, as I hope, that regard for morals, the want of which makes one of his objections to you), I could wiſh it may not be owing toyou,that your mutual diſlikes to each other do not ſubſide; for it is my earneſt hope, that in time you may ſee each other, without exciting the fears of a wife and a ſiſter for the conſequence. Not that I ſhould wiſh you to yield in points that truly concerned your honour: No, Sir, I would be as delicate in ſuch, as you yourſelf:Moredelicate, I will venture to ſay, becauſe moreuniformlyſo. How vain, how contemptible, is that pride, which ſhews itſelf in ſtanding upon diminutive obſervances; and gives up, and makes a jeſt of, the moſt important!' 

'This article being conſidered as I wiſh, all the reſt will be eaſy. Were I to accept of the handſome ſeparate proviſion you ſeem to intend me; added to the conſiderable ſums ariſen from my grandfather's eſtate ſince his death (more conſiderable, than perhaps you may ſuppoſe from your offer); I ſhould think it my duty to lay up for the family good, and for unforeſeen events out of it: For, as to my donations, I would generally confine myſelf, in them, to the tenth of my income, be it what it would. I aim at no glare in what I do of that ſort: All I wiſh for, is the power of relieving the lame, the blind, the ſick, and the induſtrious poor, whom accident has made ſo, or ſudden diſtreſs reduced. The common or bred beggars I leave to others, and to the public proviſion. They cannot be lower: Perhaps they wiſh not to be higher: And, not able to do for every one, I aim not at works of ſupererogation. Two hundred pounds a year would do all I wiſh to do of the ſeparate ſort: For all above, I would content myſelf to aſk you; except, miſtruſting yourown oeconomy, you would give up to my management and keeping, in order to provide for future contingencies, a larger portion; for which, as your ſteward, I would regularly account.' 

'As to cloaths, I have particularly two ſuits, which, having been only, in a manner, try'd on, would anſwer for any preſent occaſion. Jewels I have of my grandmother's, which want only new-ſetting: Another Set I have, which on particular days I uſed to wear. Altho' theſe are not ſent me, I have no doubt, being merely perſonals, that they will, when I ſend for them in another name: Till when I ſhould not chooſe to wear any.' 

'As to your complaints of my diffidences, and the like, I appeal to your own heart, if it be poſſible for you to make my caſe your own for one moment, and to retroſpect ſome parts of your behaviour, words, and actions, whether I am not rathe•to be juſtified than cenſured—and whether, of al•men in the world, avowing what you avow, you ought not to think ſo. If you do not, let me admoniſh you, Sir, that there muſt be too great miſmatch, as I may call it, in our minds, ever to make you wiſh to bring about a more intimate union of intereſts between Yourſelf and 

'CLARISSA HARLOWE.May20.THE original of this charming paper, as Dorca•tells me, was torn almoſt in two:—In one of her pet•I ſuppoſe!—What buſineſs have the Sex, whoſe principal glory is meekneſs, and patience, and reſignation to be in a paſſion, I trow?—Will not ſhe, who allow herſelf ſuch liberties as a maiden lady, take greate•when a married one? 

And awife,to be in a paſſion!—Let me tell th•ladies, it is a d—n'd impudent thing, begging the pardon, and asimprudentas impudent, for awife•be in a paſſion, if ſhe mean not eternal ſeparation,•wicked defiance, by it: For is it not rejecting at once all that expoſtulatory meekneſs, and gentle reaſoning, mingled with ſighs as gentle, and graced with bent knees, ſupplicating hands, and eyes lifted up to your imperial countenance, juſt running over, that ſhould make a reconciliation ſpeedy, and as laſting as ſpeedy? Even ſuppoſe the huſband is wrong, will not his being ſo, give the greater force to her expoſtulation? 

Now I think of it, a manſhouldbe wrong now-and-then, to make his wife ſhine. Miſs Howe tells my charmer, that adverſity isherſhining-time. 'Tis a generous thing in a man, to make his wife ſhine at his own expence: To give her leave to triumph over him by patient reaſoning: For were he to be tooimperialto acknowlege his fault on the ſpot, ſhe will find the benefit of her duty and ſubmiſſionin future,and in the high opinion he will conceive of her prudence and obligingneſs—And ſo, by degrees, ſhe will be her maſter's maſter. 

But for a wife to come up with a kemboed arm, the other hand thrown out, perhaps, with a pointing finger—Look ye here, Sir!—Take notice!—Ifyouare wrong,I'llbe wrong!—Ifyouare in a paſſion,I'llbe in a paſſion!—Rebuff, for rebuff, Sir!—Ifyou•ly,I'lltear!—Ifyouſwear,I'llcurſe!—And the ſame room, and the ſame-bed, ſhall not hold us, Sir!—For, remember, I am marry'd, Sir!—I'm a wife, Sir!—You can't help yourſelf, Sir!—Your honour, as well as your peace, is in my keeping!—And,•f you like not this treatment, you may have worſe, Sir! 

Ah! Jack, Jack! What man, who has obſerved•heſe things, eitherimply'd,orexpreſs'd,inotherfamilies, would wiſh to be an huſband! 

Dorcas found this paper in one of the drawers of her•ady's dreſſing-table: She was re-peruſing it, as ſhe•uppoſes, when the honeſt wench carried my meſſage•o deſire her to favour me at the tea-table; for ſheſaw her pop a paper into the drawer, as ſhe came in; and there, on her miſtreſs's going to meet me in the dining-room, ſhe found it: And to be This. 

But I had better not to have had a copy of it, as far as I know: For, determined as I was before upon my operations, it inſtantly turned all my reſolutions in her favour. Yet I would give ſomething to be convinced, that ſhe did not pop it into her drawer before the wench, in order for me to ſee it; and perhaps (if I were to take notice of it) to diſcover whether Dorcas, according to Miſs Howe's advice, were moſtmyfriend, orhers. 

The very ſuſpicion of this will do her no good: For I cannot bear to be artfully treated. People love to enjoy their own peculiar talents inmonopoly,as I may ſay. I am aware, that it will ſtrengthen thy arguments againſt me in her behalf. But I know every tittle thou canſt ſay upon it: So ſpare thy wambling nonſenſe, I deſire thee; and leave this ſweet excellence and me to our fate: That will determine for us, as it ſhall pleaſe itſelf: For, as Cowley ſays,An unſeen hand makes all our moves:And ſome are great, and ſome are ſmall;Some climb to good, ſome from good fortune fall:Some wiſe men, and ſome fools we call:Figures, alas! of ſpeech!—For deſtiny plays us all. 

But, after all, I am ſorry,almoſtſorry (for how ſhall I do to bequiteſorry, when it is notgivento me to be ſo?), that I cannot, without making any further trials, reſolve upon wedlock. 

I have juſt read over again this intended anſwer to my propoſals: And how I adore her for it! 

But yet; anotherYet!—She has not given it o•ſent it to me.—So it is notheranſwer. It is not writtenforme, tho'tome. 

Nay, ſhe has notintendedto ſend it to me: Sh•has even torn it, perhaps with indignation, as thinkingit toogoodfor me. By this action ſhe abſolutely retracts it. Why then does my fooliſh fondneſs ſeek to eſtabliſh for her the ſame merit in my heart, as if ſhe avowed it? Prythee, dear Belford, once more leave us to our fate; and do not thou interpoſe with thy nonſenſe, to weaken a ſpirit already too ſqueamiſh, and ſtrengthen a conſcience that has declared itſelf of her party. 

Then again, remember thy recent diſcoveries, Lovelace!—Remember her indifference, attended with all the appearance of contempt and hatred. View her, evennow,wrapt up in reſerve and myſtery; meditating plots, as far as thou knoweſt, againſt the ſovereignty thou haſt, by right of conqueſt, obtained over her: Remember, in ſhort, all thou haſtthreatenedto remember againſt this inſolent beauty, who is a rebel to the power ſhe has liſted under! 

But yet, how doſt thou propoſe to ſubdue thy ſweet enemy?—Abhorr'd beforce,be theneceſſityof force, if that can be avoided! There is no triumph inforce!No conqueſt over the will!—No prevailing, by gentle degrees, over the gentle paſſions!Forceis the devil! 

My curſed character, as I have often ſaid, was againſt me at ſetting out!—Yet is ſhe not awoman?Cannot I find one but half-yielding moment, if ſhe do not abſolutely hate me? 

But with what can I tempt her?—RICHES ſhe was born to, and deſpiſes, knowing what they are. JEWELS and ornaments, to a mind ſo much a jewel, and ſo richly ſet, her worthy conſciouſneſs will not let her value. LOVE, if ſhe be ſuſceptible of Love, it ſeems to be ſo much under the direction of prudence, that one unguarded moment, I fear, cannot be reaſonably hoped for: And ſo much VIGILANCE, ſo much Apprehenſiveneſs, that her fears are ever aforehand with her dangers. Then her LOVE OF VIRTUE ſeems to beprinciple,native, or, ifnotnative, ſo deeply rooted, thatits fibres have ſtruck into her heart, and, as ſhe grew up, ſo blended and twiſted themſelves with the ſtrings of life, that I doubt there is no ſeparating of the one, without cutting the others aſunder. 

What then can be done to make ſuch a matchleſs creature as this get over the firſt teſts, in order to put her to the grand proof, whether once overcome, ſhe will not be always overcome? 

By my faith, Jack, as I ſit gazing upon her, my whole ſoul in my eyes, contemplating her perfections, and thinking, when I have ſeen her eaſy and ſerene, what would be her thoughts, didſheknow my heart as well asIknow it; when I behold her diſturbed and jealous, howjuſther apprehenſions, and that ſhe cannot fear ſo much as there isroomfor her to fear; my heart often miſgives me. 

And muſt, think I, O creature ſo divinely excellent, and ſo beloved of my ſoul, thoſe arms, thoſe incircling arms, that would make a monarch happy, be uſed to repel brutal force; all their ſtrength, unavailingly perhaps, exerted to repel it, and to defend a perſon ſo delicately framed? Can violence enter into the heart of a wretch, who might intitle himſelf to all thy willing, yet virtuous love, and make the bleſſings thou aſpireſt after, herdutyto confer?—Begone, villain-purpoſes!—Sink ye all to the hell that could only inſpire ye!—And I am ready to throw myſelf at her feet, confeſs my villainous deſigns, avow my repentance, and put it out of my power to act unworthily by ſuch a peerleſs excellence. 

How then comes it, that all theſe compaſſionate, and, as ſome would call them,honeſtſenſibilities go off?—Why, Miſs Howe will tell thee: She ſays, I am thedevil.—By my conſcience, I think he has, at preſent, a great ſhare in me. 

There's ingenuity!—How I lay myſelf open to thee!—But ſeeſt thou not, that the more I ſay againſt myſelf, the leſs room there is for thee to take me totaſk?—O Belford, Belford! I cannot, cannot (at leaſt at preſent I cannot) marry. 

Then her family, my bitter enemies!—To ſupple to them, or, if I do not, to make herasunhappy, as ſhe can be from myattempts— 

Then muſt ſhe love Them too much, Me too little. 

She now ſeems to deſpiſe me: Miſs Howe declares, that ſhe really does deſpiſe me. To bedeſpiſed by aWIFE!—What a thought is that!—To beexcelled by aWIFE too, in every part of praiſeworthy knowlege!—Totake leſſons,totake inſtructions,from a WIFE!—Morethan deſpiſe me, ſhe herſelf has taken time to conſider whether ſhe does nothateme:—I hate you,Lovelace,with my whole heart,ſaid ſhe to me but yeſterday!—My ſoul is above thee, man!—Urge me not to tell thee, how ſincerely I think my ſoul above thee!—How poor indeed was I then, even in my own heart!—Soviſiblea ſuperiority, to ſo proud a ſpirit as mine!—Andherefrom Below, from BELOW indeed! I am ſo goaded on— 

Yet 'tis poor too, to think myſelf a machine.—I amnomachine.—Lovelace, thou art baſe to thyſelf, but toſuppoſethyſelf a machine. 

But having gone thus far, I ſhould be unhappy, if, after marriage, in the petulance of ill humour, I had it to reproach myſelf, that I did not try her to the utmoſt. And yet I don't know how it is, but this lady, the moment I come into her preſence, half aſſimilates me to her own virtue.—Once or twice (to ſay nothing of her triumph over me on Sunday night) I was prevailed upon to fluſter myſelf, with an intention to make ſome advances, which, if obliged to recede, I might lay upon raiſed ſpirits: But the inſtant I beheld her, I was ſoberized into awe and reverence: And the majeſty of her evenviſiblepurity firſt damped, and then extinguiſhed, mydoubleflame. 

What a ſurpriſingly powerful effect, ſo much and ſolong in my power,ſhe!ſo inſtigated by ſome of her own ſex, and ſo ſtimulated by paſſion,I!—How can this be accounted for, in a Lovelace! 

But what a heap of ſtuff have I written!—How have I been run away with!—By what?—Canſt thou ſay, by what?—O thou lurking varleteſs CONSCIENCE!—Is it Thou, that haſt thus made me of party againſt myſelf?—How cameſt thou in?—In what diſguiſe, thou egregious haunter of my more agreeable hours?—Standthou,withfate,but neuter in this controverſy; and, if I cannot do credit to human nature, and to the female ſex, by bringing down ſuch an angel as this to claſs with and adorn it (for adorn it ſhe does in her very foibles), then I am all yours, and never will reſiſt you more. 

Here I aroſe. I ſhook myſelf. The window was open. Away the troubleſome boſom-viſiter, the intruder, is flown.—I ſee it yet!—I ſee it yet!—And now it leſſens to my aching eye!—And now the cleft air has cloſed after it, and it is out of ſight!—And once more I am 

ROBERT LOVELACE.LETTER XXIX. Mr.LOVELACE,ToJOHN BELFORD,Eſq
Tueſday, May23.WELL did I, and but juſt in time, conclude to have done with Mrs. Fretchville and the houſe: For here Mennell has declar'd, that he cannot in conſcience and honour go any farther.—He would not for the world be acceſſory to the deceiving of ſuch a Lady!—I was a fool to let either you or him ſee her; for everſinceye have both had ſcruples, which neither would have had, were awomanto have been in the queſtion. 

Well, I can't help it! 

He has, however, tho' with ſome reluctance, conſented to write me a letter, provided I will allow it to he the laſt ſtep he ſhall take in this affair. 

I preſumed, I told him, that if I could make Mrs. Fretchville'swomanſupply his place, he would have no objection to that. 

None,he ſays,—But is it not pity— 

A pitiful fellow! Such a ridiculous kind of pityhis,as thoſe ſilly ſouls have, who would not kill an innocent chicken for the world; but when killed to their hands, are always the moſt greedy devourers of it. 

Now this letter gives the ſervant the ſmall-pox: And ſhe has given it to her unhappy vapouriſh lady. Vapouriſh people are perpetual ſubjects for diſeaſes to work upon.Namebut the malady, and it istheirsin a moment.Everfitted for inoculation.—The phyſical tribe's milch-cows.—A vapouriſh or ſple•netic patient is a fiddle for the doctors; and they are eternally playing upon it. Sweet muſic does it make them. All their difficulty, except a caſe extraordinary happens (as poor Mrs. Fretchville's, who hasrealizedher apprehenſions), is but to hold their countenance, while their patient is drawing up a bill of indictment againſt himſelf;—and when they have heard it, proceed topuniſh:—The right word forpreſcribe.Why ſhould they not, when the criminal has confeſſed his guilt?—Andpuniſhthey generally do with a vengeance. 

Yet, ſilly toads too, now I think of it! For why, when they know they cannot do good, may they not as well endeavour to gratify, as to nauſeate, the patient's palate? 

Were I a phyſician, I'd get all the trade to myſelf: For Malmſey, and Cyprus, and the generous products of the Cape, a little diſguiſed, ſhould be my principal doſes: As theſe would create new ſpirits,how would the revived patient covet the phyſic, and adore the doctor! 

Give all the paraders of the faculty whom thou knoweſt, this hint.—There could but one inconvenience ariſe from it. The APOTHECARIES would find their medicines coſt themſomething:But the demand for quantities would anſwer that: Since the honeſt NURSE would be the patient's taſter; perpetually requiring repetitions of the laſt cordial julap. 

Well, but to the letter—Yet what need of further explanation after the hints in my former? The widow cannot be removed; and that's enough: And Mennell's work is over; and his conſcience left to plague him for his own ſins, and not another man's: And, very poſſibly, plague enough will it give him for thoſe. 

This letter is directed,To Robert Lovelace,Eſqor, in his abſence, To his Lady.She had refuſed dining with me, or ſeeing me; and I was out when it came. She open'd it: So is my lady by her own conſent, proud and ſaucy as ſhe is. 

I am glad at my heart that it came before we intirely make up. She would elſe, perhaps, have concluded it to be contrived for a delay: And now, moreover, we can accommodate our old and new quarrels together; and that's contrivance, you know. But how is her dear haughty heart humbled to what it was when I knew her firſt, that ſhe can apprehendanydelays from me; and have nothing to do but to vex at them! 

I came in to dinner. She ſent me down the letter, deſiring my excuſe for opening it. Did it before ſhe was aware. Lady-Pride, Belford!—Recollection, then Retrogradation! 

I requeſted to ſee her upon it that moment. But ſhe deſires to ſuſpend our interview till morning. I will bring her to own, before I have done with her, that ſhe can't ſee me too often. 

My impatience was ſo great, on an occaſion ſounexpected,that I could not help writing, to tell her,'how much vex'd I was at the accident: But that it need not delay my happy day, as That did not depend upon the houſe [She knew That before, ſhe'll think, and ſo did I]: And as Mrs. Fretchville, by Mr. Mennell, ſo handſomely expreſſed her concern upon it, and her wiſhes, that it could ſuit us to bear with the unavoidable delay, I hoped, that going down to The Lawn for two or three of the ſummer-months, when I was made the happieſt of men, would be favourable to all round.' 

The dear creature takes this incident to heart, I believe: And ſends word to my repeated requeſt to ſee her, notwithſtanding her denial, that ſhe cannot till the morning: It ſhall be then at ſix o'clock, if I pleaſe! 

To be ſure Idopleaſe! 

Can ſee her but once a day now, Jack! 

Did I tell thee, that I wrote a letter to my couſin Montague, wondering that I heard not from Lord M. as the ſubject was ſo very intereſting? In it I acquainted her with the houſe I was about taking; and with Mrs. Fretchville's vapouriſh delays. 

I was very loth to engage my own family, either man or woman, in this affair; but I muſt take my meaſures ſecurely: And already they all think as bad of me as they well can. You obſerve by my Lord M.'s to yourſelf, that the well-manner'd Peer is afraid I ſhould play this admirable creature one of myuſual dog's tricks. 

I have received juſt now an anſwer from Charlotte. 

Charlotte i'n't well. A ſtomach-diſorder. 

No wonder a girl's ſtomach ſhould plague her. A ſingle lady; that's it. When ſhe has a man to plague, it will have ſomething beſides itſelf to prey upon. Knoweſt thou not moreover, that man is the woman'sSun; woman is the man's Earth?—How dreary, how deſolate, the Earth, that is deprived of the all-ſalubriating Sun-ſhine! 

Poor Charlotte! But Iheardſhe was not well: That encouraged me to write to her; and to expreſs myſelf a little concerned, that ſhe had not of her own accord thought of a viſit in town to my charmer. 

Here follows a copy of her letter: Thou wilt ſee by it, that every little monkey is to catechiſe me. They all depend upon my good-nature. 

M. Hall,May22.Dear Couſin,WE have been in daily hope for a long time, I muſt call it, of hearing that the happy knot was ty'd. My Lord has been very much out of order: And yet nothing would ſerve him, but he would himſelf write an anſwer to your letter. It was the only opportunity he ſhould ever have, perhaps, to throw in a little good advice to you, with the hope of its being of any ſignification; and he has been ſeveral hours in a day, as his gout would let him, buſied in it: It wants now only his laſt reviſal. He hopes it will have the greater weight with you, if it appear all in his own hand-writing. 

Indeed, Mr. Lovelace, his worthy heart is wrapt up in you. I wiſh you loved yourſelf but half as well. But I believe too, that if all the family loved you leſs, you would love yourſelf more. 

His Lordſhip has been very buſy, at the times he could not write, in conſulting Pritchard about thoſe eſtates, which he propoſes to transfer to you on the happy occaſion, that he may anſwer your letter in the moſt acceptable manner; and ſhew, by effects, how kindly he takes your invitation. I aſſure you, he is mighty proud of it. 

As for myſelf, I am not at all well, and have not been for ſome weeks paſt, with my old ſtomach-diſorder. I had certainly elſe before now have donemyſelf the honour you wonder I havenotdone myſelf. My aunt Lawrance, who would have accompanied me (for we had laid it all out), has been exceedingly buſy in her law-affair; her antagoniſt, who is actually on the ſpot, having been making propoſals for an accommodation. But you may aſſure yourſelf, that when our dear relation-elect ſhall be enter'd upon the new habitation you tell me of, we will do ourſelves the honour of viſiting her; and if any delay ariſes from the dear lady's want of courage, which, conſidering her man, let me tell you, may very well be, we will endeavour to inſpire her with it, and be ſponſors for you;—for, couſin, I believe you have need to be chriſten'd over again before you are intitled to ſo great a bleſſing. What think you? 

Juſt now, my Lord tells me, he will diſpatch a man on purpoſe with his letter to-morrow: So I need not have written. But now I have, let it go; and by Empſon, who ſets out directly on his return to town. 

My beſt compliments, and ſiſter's, to the moſt deſerving Lady in the world (You will need no other direction to the perſon meant), conclude me 

Your affectionate Couſin and Servant,CHARL. MONTAGUE.THOU ſeeſt how ſeaſonably this letter comes. I hope my Lord will write nothing but what I may ſhew my beloved. I have actually ſent her up this letter of Charlotte's; and hope for happy effects from it. 

THE Lady, in her next letter, gives Miſs Howe an account of what has paſſed between Mr. Lovelace and herſelf. She reſents his behaviour with her uſual dignity: But when ſhe comes to mention Mr. Mennell's letter, ſhe re-urges Miſs Howe to perfect her ſcheme for her deliverance; being reſolved to leavehim. But, dating again, on his ſending up to her Miſs Montague's letter, ſhe alters her mind, and deſires her to ſuſpend, for the preſent, her application to Mrs. Townſend. 

'I had begun, ſays ſhe, to ſuſpect all he had ſaid of Mrs. Fretchville and her houſe; and even Mr. Mennell himſelf, though ſo well appearing a man. But now that I find Mr. Lovelace had apprized his relations of his intention to take it; and had engaged ſome of the Ladies to viſit me there; I could hardly forbear blaming myſelf for cenſuring him as capable of ſo vile an impoſture. But may he not thank himſelf for acting ſo very unaccountably, and taking ſuch needleſly-wry ſteps, as he has done; embaraſſing, as I told him, his own meanings, if they were good?' 

LETTER XXX. Mr.LOVELACE,ToJOHN BELFORD,Eſq
Wedneſd. May24.He gives his friend an account of their interview that morning; and of the happy effects of his couſin Montague's letter in his favour. Her reſerves, however, he tells him, are not abſolutely baniſhed. But this he imputes to form. 

 

IT isnotin the power of woman,ſays he,to be altogether ſincere on theſe occaſions. But why?—Do they think it ſo great a diſgrace to be found out to be really what theyare? 

I regretted the illneſs of Mrs. Fretchville; as the intention I had to fix her dear ſelf in the houſe before the happy knot was tied, would have ſet her in that independence inappearance,as well asfact,which was neceſſary to ſhew to all the world, that her choice was free; andasthe ladies of my family would have been proud to make their court to her there; whilethe ſettlements and our equipages were preparing. But on any other account, there was no great matter in it; ſince when my happy day was over, we could, with ſo much convenience, go down to the Lawn, or to my Lord M.'s, or to either of my aunts in town; which would give full time to provide ourſelves with ſervants, and other accommodations. 

How ſweetly the charmer liſten'd! 

I aſked her, If ſhe had had the ſmall-pox? 

'Twas always a doubtful point with her mother and Mrs. Norton, ſhe own'd. But altho' ſhe was not afraid of it, ſhe choſe not unneceſſarily to ruſh into places where it was. 

Right, thought I—Elſe, I ſaid, it would not have been amiſs for her to ſee the houſe before ſhe went into the country; for, ifſheliked it not, I was not obliged to have it. 

She aſked, If ſhe might take a copy of Miſs Montague's letter? 

I ſaid, She might keep the letter itſelf, and ſend it to Miſs Howe, if ſhe pleaſed; for that, I ſuppoſed, was her intention. She bow'd her head to me. There, Jack!—I ſhall have her courteſy to me, by-and-by, I queſtion not. What a-devil had I to do, to terrify the ſweet creature by my termagant projects!—Yet it was not amiſs, I believe, to make her afraid of me. Sheſays,I am an unpolite man—And every polite inſtance from ſuch a one, is deem'd a favour. 

Talking of the ſettlements, I told her, that I had rather Pritchard (mentioned by my couſin Charlotte), had not been conſulted on this occaſion. Pritchard, indeed, was a very honeſt man; and had been for a generation in the family; and knew the eſtates, and the condition of them, better than either my Lord or myſelf: But Pritchard, like other old men, was diffident and ſlow; and valued himſelf upon his ſkill as a draughts-man; and for the ſake of that paltry reputation,muſt have all his forms preſerved, were an imperial crown to depend upon his diſpatch. 

I kiſſed her unrepulſing hand no leſs than five times during this converſation. Lord, Jack, how my generous heart run over!—She was quite obliging at parting.—She in a manner aſked meleaveto retire; to reperuſe Charlotte's letter.—I think ſhe bent her knees to me; but I won't be ſure.—How happy might we have both been long ago, had the dear creature been always as complaiſant to me! For I do love reſpect, and, whether I deſerved it or not, always had it, till I knew this proud beauty. 

And now, Belford, are we in a train, or the duce is in it. Every fortified town has its ſtrong and its weak place. I had carried on my attacks againſt the impregnable parts. I have no doubt but I ſhall eitherſhineorſmuggleher out of her cloak, ſince ſhe and Miſs Howe have intended to employ a ſmuggler againſtme.—All we wait for now, is my Lord's letter. 

But I had like to haveforgotto tell thee, that we have been not a little alarm'd, by ſome inquiries that have been made after me and my beloved, by a man of good appearance; who yeſterday procured a tradeſman in the neighbouroood to ſend for Dorcas: Of whom he aſked ſeveral queſtions relating to us; and particularly (as we boarded and lodged in one houſe), whether we were married? 

This has given my beloved great uneaſineſs. And I could not help obſerving upon it, to her, how right a thing it was, that we had given out below that we were married. The inquiry, moſt probably, I ſaid, was from her brother's quarter; and now, perhaps, that our marriage was owned, we ſhould hear no more of his machinations. The perſon, it ſeems, was curious to know the day that the ceremony was performed. But Dorcas refuſed to give him any other particulars, than that weweremarried; and was the more reſerved, as he declined to tell her the motives of his inquiry. 

LETTER XXXI. Mr.LOVELACE,ToJOHN BELFORD,Eſq
May24.THE devil take this uncle of mine! He has at laſt ſent me a letter, which I cannot ſhew, without expoſing the head of our family for a fool. A confounded parcel of pop-guns has he let off upon me. I was in hopes he had exhauſted his whole ſtock of this ſort, in his letter to you.—To keep it back, to delay ſending it, till he had recollected all thisfarragoof nonſenſe—Confound hisWiſdom of nations,if ſo much of it is to be ſcraped together, in diſgrace of itſelf, to make one egregious ſimpleton!—But I am glad I am fortified with this piece of flagrant folly, however; ſince, in all human affairs, theconvenientandinconvenient,thegoodand thebad,are ſo mingled, that there is no having the one without the other. 

I have already offer'd the bill incloſed in it to my beloved; and read to her part of the letter. But ſhe refuſed the bill: And I, being in caſh, ſhall return it. She ſeemed very deſirous to peruſe the whole letter. And when I told her, that were it not for expoſing the writer, I would oblige her, ſhe ſaid, It would not be expoſing his Lordſhip to ſhew it to her; and that ſhe always preferred the heart to the head. I knew her meaning—But did not thank her for it. 

All that makes for me in it, I will tranſcribe for her—Yet, hang it, ſhe ſhall have the letter, and my ſoul with it, for one conſenting kiſs. 

SHE has got the letter from me, without the reward. Duce take me, if I had the courage to propoſe the condition! A new character this of baſhfulneſs in thy friend.—I ſee, that a truly modeſt womanmay make even a confident man keep his diſtance. By my ſoul, Belford, I believe, that nine women in ten, who fall, fall either from their own vanity, or levity, or for want of circumſpection, and proper reſerves. 

I DID intend to take my reward on her returning a letter ſo favourable to us both. But ſhe ſent it to me, ſealed up by Dorcas.—I might have thought that there were two or three hints in it, that ſhe would be too nice immediately to appear to. I ſend it to thee; and here will ſtop, to give thee time to read it. Return it as ſoon as thou haſt peruſed it. 

LETTER XXXII. LordM.ToROBERT LOVELACE,Eſq
Tueſday, May23.IT is a long lane that has no turning.—Do not deſpiſe me for my proverbs—You know I was always fond of them; and, if you had been ſo too, it would have been the better for you, let me tell you. I dare ſwear, the fine lady you are ſo likely to be ſoon happy with, will be far from deſpiſing them; for I am told, that ſhe writes well, and that all her letters are full of ſentences. God convert you! for nobody but He and this lady, can. 

I have no manner of doubt now but that you will marry, as your father, and all your anceſtors, did before you: Elſe you would have had no title to be my heir; nor can your deſcendents have any title to be yours, unleſs they are legitimate; that's worth your remembrance, Sir!—No man is always a fool, every man ſometimes.—But your follies, I hope, are now at an end. 

I know, you have vowed revenge againſt this fine lady's family: But no more of that, now. You muſtlook upon them all as your relations; and forgive, and forget. And when they ſee you make a good huſband, and a good father (which God ſend, for all our ſakes!), they will wonder at their nonſenſical antipathy, and beg your pardon: But while they think you a vile fellow, and a rake, how can they either love you, or excuſe their daughter? 

And methinks I could wiſh to give a word of comfort to the lady, who, doubtleſs, muſt be under great fears, how ſhe ſhall be able to hold-in ſuch a wild creature, as you have hitherto been. I would hint to her, that, by ſtrong arguments, and gentle words, ſhe may do any thing with you; for tho' you are too apt to be hot, gentle words will cool you, and bring you into the temper that is neceſſary for your cure. 

Would to God,mypoor lady, your aunt, who is dead and gone, had been a proper patient for the ſame remedy! God reſt her ſoul! No reflections upon her memory!Worth is beſt known by want!I knowhersnow; and if I had went firſt, ſhe would by this time have knownmine. 

There is great wiſdom in that ſaying,God ſend me a friend, that may tell me of my faults: If not, an enemy; and he will.Not that I am your enemy; and that you know well.The more noble any one is, the more humble:So bear with me, if you would be thought noble.—Am I not your uncle? And do I not deſign to be better to you, than your father could be? Nay, I will be your father too, when the happy day comes; ſince you deſire it: And pray make my compliments to my dear niece; and tell her, I wonder much that ſhe has ſo long deferred your happineſs. 

Pray let her know, I will preſent HER (notyou) either my Lancaſhire ſeat, orThe Lawnin Hertfordſhire; and ſettle upon her a thouſand pounds a year, peny-rents; to ſhew her, that we are not a family to take baſe advantages: And you may havewritings drawn, and ſettle as you will.—Honeſt Pritchard has the rent-roll of both theſe eſtates at his fingers end; and has been a good old ſervant. I recommend him to your Lady's favour. I have already conſulted him: He will tell you what is beſt for you, and moſt pleaſing to me. 

I am ſtill very bad with my gout; but will come in a litter, as ſoon as the day is fixed: It would be the joy of my heart, to join your hands. And let me tell you, if you do not make the beſt of huſbands to ſo good a young lady, and one who has had ſo much courage for your ſake, I will renounce you; and ſettle all I can upon her and hers by you, and leave you out of the queſtion. 

If any thing be wanting for your further ſecurity, I am ready to give it (tho' you know, that my word has always been look'd upon as my bond): And when the Harlowes know all this, let us ſee whether they are able to bluſh, and take ſhame upon themſelves. 

Your two aunts want only to know the day, to make all the country round them blaze, and all their tenants mad. And, if any one of mine be ſober upon the occaſion, Pritchard ſhall eject him. And, on the birth of the firſt child, if a ſon, I will do ſomething more for you, and repeat all our rejoicings. 

I ought indeed to have written ſooner. But I knew, that if you thought me long, and were in haſte as to your nuptials, you would write and tell me ſo. But my gout was very troubleſome: And I am but a ſlow writer, you know, at beſt: For Compoſing is a thing, that tho' formerly I was very ready at it (as my Lord Lexington uſed to ſay); yet having left it off a great while, I am not ſo now. And I choſe, on this occaſion, to write all out of my own head and memory; and to give you my beſt advice; for I may never have ſuch an opportunity again. You have had (God mend you!) a ſtrange way of turning your back upon all I have ſaid; This once, I hope, youwill be more attentive to the advice I give you for your own good. 

I had ſtill another end; nay, two other ends. 

The one was, That now you are upon the borders of wedlock, as I may ſay, andall your wild cats will•e ſown,I would give you ſome inſtructions as to your public as well as private behaviour in life; which, intending you ſo much good as I'do, you ought to hear; and perhaps would never have liſten'd to, on any leſs extraordinary occaſion. 

The ſecond is, That your dear lady-elect (who is, it ſeems, herſelf ſo fine and ſo ſententious a writer) will ſee by this, that it is not our faults, nor for want of the beſt advice, that you was not a better man than you have hitherto been. 

And now, in few words, for the conduct I would wiſh you to follow in public, as well as in private; if you would think me worthy of adviſing. It ſhall be ſhort; ſo be not uneaſy. 

As to theprivatelife: Love your Lady as ſhe deſerves.Let your actions praiſe you.Be a good huſband; and ſo give the lye to all your enemies; and make them aſham'd of their ſcandals: And let us have pride in ſaying, that Miſs Harlowe has not done either herſelf, or family, any diſcredit by coming among us. Do this; and I, and your aunts, will love you for ever. 

As to yourpublicconduct:—This is what I could wiſh: But I reckon your Lady's wiſdom will put us both right—No diſparagement, Sir; ſince, with all your wit, you have not hitherto ſhewn much wiſdom, you know. 

Get into parliament as ſoon as you can: For you have talents to make a great figure there. Who ſo proper to aſſiſt in making new holding laws, as thoſe whom no law in being could hold? 

Then, for ſo long as you will give attendance, in St. Stephen's chapel—(Its being called a chapel, I hope,will notdiſguſtyou: I am ſure I have known many a riot there:—A Speaker has a hard time of it! But wePeershave more decorum.—But what was I going to ſay?—I muſt go back. 

For ſo long as you will give your attendance in parliament) for ſo long will you be out of miſchief; out ofprivatemiſchief, at leaſt: And may St. Stephen's fate be yours, if you wilfully dopublicmiſchief! 

When a new election comes, you will have two or three Boroughs, you know, to chooſe out of:—But if you ſtay till then, I had rather you were for the Shire. 

You'll have intereſt enough, I am ſure; and being ſo handſome a man, the women will make their huſbands vote for you. 

I ſhall long to read your ſpeeches. I expect you will ſpeak, if occaſion offers, the very firſt day. You want no courage; and think highly enough of yourſelf, and lowly enough of every-body elſe, to ſpeak on all occaſions. 

As to the methods of the houſe, you have ſpirit enough, I fear, to be too much above them: Take care of that.—I don't ſo much fear your want of good-manners. Tomen,you want no decency, if they don't provoke you: As to that, I wiſh you'd only learn to be as patient of contradiction from others, as you would have other people be toyou. 

Altho' I would not have you to be a Courtier; neither would I have you be a Malecontent. I remember (for I have it down) what my old friend Archibald Hutcheſon ſaid, and it was a very good ſaying—(to Mr. Secretary Craggs, I think, it was)—'I look upon an adminiſtration, as intitled to every vote I can with good conſcience give it; for a Houſe of Commons ſhould not needleſly put drags upon the wheels of Government: And, when I have not given it my vote, it was with regret: And, for my Country's ſake, I wiſh'd with all my heart, the meaſure had been ſuch as I could have approved.' 

And another ſaying he had, which was this;'Neither can an Oppoſition, neither can a Miniſtry, be always wrong. To be a plumb man therefore with either, is an infallible mark, that that man muſt mean more and worſe than he will own he does mean.' 

Are theſe Sayings bad, Sir? Are they to be deſpiſed?—Well then, why ſhould I be deſpiſed for remembering them, and quoting them, as I love to do? Let me tell you, if you loved my company more than you do, you would not be the worſe for it: I may ſay ſo without any vanity; ſince it is other mens wiſdom, and not my own, that I am ſo fond of. But to add a word or two more, on this occaſion; and I may never have ſuch another; for youmuſtread this thro'—Love honeſt men, and herd with them, in the houſe and out of the houſe; by whatever names they be dignified or diſtinguiſhed:Keep good men company, and you ſhall be of the number.But did I, or did I not, write this before?—Writing, at ſo many different times, and ſuch a quantity, one may forget. 

You may come in for the title when I am dead and gone—God help me!—So I would have you keep an equilibrium. If once you get the name of being a fine ſpeaker, you may have any thing: And, to be ſure, you have naturally a great deal of elocution; a tongue that would delude an angel, as the women ſay: To their ſorrow, ſome of them, poor creatures!—A leading man in the Houſe of Commons, is a very important character; becauſe that houſe has the giving of money: AndMoney makes the mare to go; ay, and Queens and Kings too, ſometimes, to go in a manner very different from what they might otherwiſe chooſe to go, let me tell you. 

However, methinks, I would not have you take a place neither—It will double your value, and yourintereſt, if it be believed, that you will not: For, you will then ſtand in no man's way, you will ha•no envy; but pure ſterling reſpect; and both ſides w•court you. 

For your part, you will not want a plac•as ſome others do, to piece up their broken fortune If you can now live reputably upon two thouſa•pounds a year, it will be hard if you cannot hereaft•upon ſeven or eight—Leſs you will not have, if yo•oblige me; as now by marrying ſo fine a lady,•e•much you will—And all this, beſide Lady Betty and Lady Sarah's favours!—What, in the name•wonder, could poſſibly poſſeſs the proud Harlowes That Son, that Son of theirs!—But, for his dear ſiſter'•ſake, I will ſay no more of him. 

I never was offer'd a place myſelf: And the on•one I would have taken, had I been offer'd it, wa•Maſter of the Buckhounds; for I loved hunting whe•I was young; and it carries a good ſound with it for us who live in the country. Often have I though•of that excellent old adage;He that eats the King'•gooſe, ſhall be choaked with his feathers.I wiſh t•the Lord, this was thoroughly conſider'd by place hunters! It would be better for them, and for thei•poor families.—I could ſay a great deal more, and a•equally to the purpoſe. But really I am tired; and ſ•I doubt are you. And beſides, I would reſerve ſome thing for converſation. 

My couſins Montague, and my two ſiſters, join i•compliments to my niece that is to be. If ſhe woul•chooſe to have the knot tied among us, pray tell her, that we ſhall ſee itſecurely done:And we will make all the country ring, and blaze, for a week together. But ſo, I believe, I ſaid before. 

If any thing farther may be needful toward promoting your reciprocal felicity, let me know it; and how you order about the day; and all that. The incloſed bill is very much at your ſervice: 'Tis payable•t ſight, as whatever elſe you may have occaſion•or, ſhall be. 

So God bleſs you both; and make things as convenient to my gout as you can; tho' be it whenever it will, I will hobble to you; for I long to ſee you; and my niece full as much as you; and am, in expec•tion of that happy time, 

Your moſt affectionate Uncle,M.LETTER XXXIII. Mr.LOVELACE,ToJOHN BELFORD,Eſq
Thurſday, May25.THOU ſeeſt, Belford, how we now drive before the wind.—The dear creature now comes almoſt at the firſt word, whenever I deſire the honour of her company. I told her laſt night, that, apprehending delay from Pritchard's ſlowneſs, I was determined to•eave it to my Lord to make his compliments in his•wn way; and had actually that afternoon put my writings into the hands of a very eminent lawyer, Counſellor Williams, with directions for him to draw•p ſettlements from my own eſtate, and conformable•o thoſe of my own mother; which I put into his hands at the ſame time. It had been, I ſaid, no ſmall part of my concern, that her frequent diſpleaſure, and our mutual miſapprehenſions, had hindered me from adviſing with her before, on this ſubject. Indeed,•ndeed, my deareſt life, ſaid I, you have hitherto afforded me but a very thorny courtſhip. 

She was ſilent.Kindlyſilent. For well know I, that ſhe could have recriminated upon me with a vengeance.—But I was willing to ſee, if ſhe were not•oth to diſoblige me now.—I comforted myſelf, I•aid, with the hopes, that all my difficulties were over; and that every paſt diſobligation would now be•uried in oblivion. 

Now, Belford, I have actually depoſited theſe writings with Counſellor Williams; and I expect the draughts in a week at furtheſt. So ſhall be doubly armed. For if I attempt, and fail, theſe will be ready to throw in, to make her have patience with me till I can try again. 

I have more contrivances ſtill in embryo. I could tell thee of an hundred, and ſtill hold another hundred in petto, to pop in, as I go along, to excite thy ſurprize, and to keep up thy attention. Nor rave thou at me; but, if thou art my friend, think of Miſs Howe's letters, and of her ſmuggling ſcheme. All owing to my fair captive's informations and incitements.—Am I not avillain,afool,aBeelzebub,with them already?—Yet no harm done by me, nor ſo much as attempted? 

Every thing of this nature, the dear creature anſwered (with a downcaſt eye, and a bluſhing cheek), ſhe left to me. 

I propoſed my Lord's chapel for the celebration, where we might have the preſence of Lady Betty, Lady Sarah, and my two couſins Montague. 

She ſeemed not to favour a public celebration; and waved this ſubject for the preſent. I did ſuppoſe, that ſhe would not chooſe to be married in public, any more than me: So I preſſed not this matter further juſt then. 

But patterns I actually produced; and a jeweller was to bring as this day ſeveral ſets of jewels, for her choice. But the patterns ſhe would not open. She ſighed at the mention of them; The ſecond patterns, ſhe ſaid, that had been offered to herSee Vol.I.p.279.: And very peremptorily forbid the jeweller's coming; as well as declined my offer of getting my own mother's to be new-ſet; at leaſt for the preſent. 

I do aſſure thee, Belford, I was in earneſt in all this. My whole eſtate is nothing to me, put in competition with her hoped-for favour. 

She then told me, that ſhe had written her opinion of my general propoſals; and there had expreſſed her mind, as to cloaths and jewels:—But on my behaviour to her, for no cauſe that ſhe knew of, on Sunday night, ſhe had torn the paper in two. I earneſtly preſſed her to let me be favoured with a ſight of this paper, torn as it was. And after ſome heſitation, ſhe withdrew, and ſent it to me by Dorcas. 

I peruſed it again. It was in a manner new to me, tho' I had read it ſo lately; and by my ſoul I could hardly ſtand it. An hundred admirable creatures I called her to myſelf.—But I charge thee, write not a word to me in her favour, if thou meaneſt her well; for if I ſpare her, it muſt be allex mero motu. 

You may eaſily ſuppoſe, when I was re-admitted to her preſence, that I ran over in her praiſes, and in vows of gratitude, and everlaſting love. But here's the devil; ſhe ſtill receives all I ſay with reſerve; or if it be not with reſerve, ſhe receives it ſo much as her due, that ſhe is not at all raiſed by it. Some women are undone by praiſe, by flattery. I myſelf am proud of praiſe.—Perhaps thou wilt ſay, that thoſe are moſt proud of it, who leaſt deſerve it—As thoſe are of riches and grandeur, who are not born to either. I own, that it requires a ſoul to be ſuperior to theſe foibles. Have I not then a ſoul?—Surely, I have.—Let me then be conſider'd as an exception to the rule. 

Now have I a foundation to go upon in my terms. My Lord, in the exuberance of his generoſity, mentions a thouſand pounds a year peny-rents.ThisI know, that were I to marry this Lady, he would rather ſettle upon her all he has a mind to ſettle, than upon me: And has even threatened, that if I prove not a good huſband to her, he will leave all he can at his death, from me, to her.—Yet conſiders not, that a woman ſo perfect, can never be diſpleaſed with her huſband but tohisdiſgrace; for who will blameher?Another reaſon, why a Lovelace ſhould not wiſh to marry a CLARISSA. 

But what a pretty fellow of an uncle mine, to think of making a wife independent of her emperor, and a rebel of courſe—Yet ſmarted himſelf for an error of this kind! 

My beloved, in her torn paper, mentions but two hundred pounds a year, for her ſeparate uſe. I inſiſted upon her naming a larger ſum. She ſaid, it might then be three; and I, for fear ſhe ſhould ſuſpect very large offers, named five, and the intire diſpoſal of all arrears in her father's hands, for the benefit of Mrs. Norton, or whom ſhe pleaſed. 

She ſaid, that the good woman would be uneaſy, if any thing more than a competency were done for her. She was for ſuiting all her diſpoſitions of this kind, ſhe ſaid, to the uſual way of life of the perſon. To go beyond it, was but to put the benefited upon projects, or to make them aukward in a new ſtate, when they might ſhine in that they were accuſtomed to. And to put it into ſo good a mother's power to give her ſon a beginning in his buſineſs, at a proper time; yet to leave her ſomething for herſelf, to ſet her above want, or the neceſſity of taking back from her child what ſhe had been enabled to beſtow upon him, would be the height of ſuch a worthy parent's ambition. 

Here is prudence! Here is judgment in ſo young a creature! How do I hate the Harlowes for producing ſuch an angel!—O why, why, did ſhe refuſe my ſincere addreſs to tie the knot before we came to this houſe! 

But yet, what mortifies my pride, is, that this exalted creature, if I were to marry her, would not be governed in her behaviour to me by love, but by generoſity merely, or by blind duty; and had rather live ſingle, than be mine. 

I cannot bear this. I would have the woman whom I honour with my name, if ever I confer this honourupon any, forego even her ſuperior duties for me. I would have her look after me when I go out, as far as ſhe can ſee me, as my Roſebud after her Johnny; and meet me at my return with rapture. I would be the ſubject of her dreams, as well as of her waking thoughts. I would have her look upon every moment loſt, that is not paſſed with me: Sing to me, read to me, play to me when I pleaſed; no joy ſo great as in obeying me. When I ſhould be inclined to love, overwhelm me with it; when to be ſerious or ſolitary, if intruſive, awfully ſo; retiring at a nod; approaching me only if I ſmiled encouragement: Steal into my preſence with ſilence; out of it, if not noticed, on tiptoe. Be aLady Eaſyto all my pleaſures, and valuing thoſe moſt, who moſt contributed to them; only ſighing in private, that it was notherſelfat the time.—Thus of old did the contending wives of the honeſt patriarchs; each recommending her handmaid to her lord, as ſhe thought it would oblige him, and looking upon the genial product as her own. 

The gentle Waller ſays,Women are born to be controul'd.Gentle as he was, he knew that. A tyrant-huſband makes a dutiful wife. And why do the Sex love rakes, but becauſe they know how to direct their uncertain wills, and manage them? 

ANOTHER agreeable converſation. The day of days the ſubject. As to fixing a particular one, that need not be done till the ſettlements are completed. As to marrying at my Lord's chapel, the ladies of my family preſent, that would be making a public affair of it; and my charmer obſerved with regret, that it ſeemed to be my Lord's intention to make it ſo. 

It could not be imagined, I ſaid, but that his Lordſhip's ſetting out in a litter, and coming to town, as well as his taſte for glare, and the joy he would take to ſee me married at laſt, would give it as much theair of a public marriage, as if the ceremony were performed at his own chapel, all the ladies preſent. 

She could not bear the thoughts of a public day. It would carry with it an air of inſult upon her whole family. And, for her part, if my Lord would not take it amiſs (and perhaps he would not, as the motion came not from himſelf, but from me), ſhe would very willingly diſpenſe with his Lordſhip's preſence; the rather, as dreſs and appearance would then be unneceſſary. For ſhe could not bear to think of decking her perſon, while her parents were in tears. 

How excellent this, did not her parents richly deſerve to be in tears! 

See, Belford, with ſo charming a niceneſs, we might have been a long time ago upon the ve•ge of the ſtate, and yet found a great deal to do, before we enter'd into it. 

All obedience, all reſignation—No will but hers. I withdrew, and wrote directly to my Lord; and ſhe not diſapproving of it, ſent it away. The purport as follows; for I took no copy. 

'That I was much obliged to his Lordſhip for his intended goodneſs to me, on an occaſion that was the moſt ſolemn and awful of my life. That the admirable Lady, whom he ſo juſtly praiſed, thought his Lordſhip's propoſals in her favour too high. That ſhe choſe not to make a public appearance, if, without diſobliging my friends, ſhe could avoid it, till a reconciliation with her own could be effected. That altho' ſhe expreſſed a grateful ſenſe of his Lordſhip's conſent to give her to me with his own hand; yet preſuming, that the motive to his kind intention, was rather to do her honour, than that it otherwiſe would have been his own choice (eſpecially as travelling would be at this time ſo inconvenient to him), ſhe thought it adviſeable to ſave his Lordſhip trouble on this occaſion; and hoped he would take, as meant, her declining the favour.' 

'The Lawn, I tell him, will be moſt acceptable to retire to; and ſtill the more, as it is ſo to his Lordſhip.' 

'But, if he pleaſes, the jointure may be made from my own eſtate; leaving to his Lordſhip's goodneſs the alternative.' 

'That I had offer'd to preſent to the Lady his Lordſhip's bill; but on her declining to accept of it (having myſelf no preſent occaſion for it), I returned it incloſed, with my thanks,&c.' 

And is not this going a plaguy length? What a figure ſhould I make in rakiſh annals, if at laſt I ſhould be caught in my own gin? 

The Sex may ſay what they will, but a poor innocent fellow had need to take great care of himſelf, when he dances upon the edge of the matrimonial precipice. Many a faint-hearted man, when he began in jeſt, or only deſigned to ape gallantry, has been forced into earneſt, by being over-prompt, and taken at his word, not knowing how to own that he meant leſs, than the Lady ſuppoſed he meant. I am the better enabled to judge that this muſt have been the caſe of many a ſneaking varlet; becauſe I, who know the female world as well as any man in it of my ſtanding, am ſo frequently in doubt of myſelf, and know not what to make of the matter. 

Then theſe little ſly rogues, how they lie couchant, ready to ſpring upon us harmleſs fellows, the moment we are in their reach!—When the ice is once broken for them, how ſwiftly can they make to port!—Meantime, the ſubject they can leaſtſpeakto, they moſtthinkof. Nor can you talk of the ceremony before they have laid out in their minds how it is all to be.—Little ſaucy-face deſigners! how firſt they draw themſelves in, then us! 

But be all theſe things as they will, Lord M. never in his life received ſo handſome a letter as this from his nephew. 

THE Lady, after having given to Miſs Howe the particulars which are contained in Mr. Lovelace's laſt letter, thus expreſſes herſelf. 

'A principal conſolation ariſing from theſe favourable appearances, is, that I, who have now but one only friend, ſhall moſt probably, and if it be not my own fault, have as many new ones, as there are perſons in Mr. Lovelace's family; and this whether Mr. Lovelace treat me kindly, or not. And who knows, but that by degrees, thoſe new friends, by their rank and merit, may have weight enough to get me reſtored to the favour of my relations? Till which can be effected, I ſhall not be tolerably eaſy. Happy I never expect to be. Mr. Lovelace's mind sand mine are vaſtly different; different ineſſentials. 

'But as matters are at preſent circumſtanced, I pray you, my dear friend, to keep to yourſelf every thing that, revealed, might bring diſcredit to him—Better any-body expoſe a huſband than a wife, if I am to be ſo; and what is ſaid by you will be thought to come from me. 

'It ſhall be my conſtant prayer, that all the felicities which this world can afford, may be yours. And that the Almighty will never ſuffer you nor yours to the remoteſt poſterity, to want ſuch a friend, as my Anna Howe has been to 

HerCLARISSA HARLOWE.MR. Lovelace, to ſhew the wantonneſs of his invention, in his next, gives his friend an account of a ſcheme he had framed to be revenged on Miſs Howe, when ſhe ſet out for the iſle of Wight; which he heard ſhe was to do, accompanied by her mother and Mr. Hickman, in order to viſit a rich aunt there, who deſired to ſeeher,and her future conſort, before ſhe changed her name. But as he does not intend to carry it into execution, it is omitted. 

LETTER XXXIV. Mr.LOVELACE,ToJOHN BELFORD,Eſq
IF, Belford, thou likeſt not my plot upon Miſs Howe, I have three or four more as good in my own opinion; better, perhaps, they will be in thine: And ſo 'tis but getting looſe from thy preſent engagement, and thou ſhalt pick and chooſe. But as for thy three brethren, they muſt do as I'd have them: And ſo, indeed, muſt thou:—Elſe why am I your general?—But I will refer this ſubject to its proper ſeaſon. Thou knoweſt, that I never abſolutely conclude upon a project, till 'tis time for execution: And then lightning ſtrikes not quicker than I. 

And now to the ſubject next my heart. 

Wilt thou believe me, when I tell thee, that I have ſo many contrivances riſing up and crouding upon me for preference, with regard to my Gloriana, that I hardly know which to chooſe?—I could tell thee of no leſs than ſix princely ones, any of whichmuſtdo. But as the dear creature has not grudged giving me trouble, I think I ought not, in gratitude, to ſpare combuſtibles for her; but, on the contrary, to make her ſtare and ſtand aghaſt, by ſpringing three or four mines at once. 

Thou remembreſt what Shakeſpeare, in his Troilus and Creſſida, makes Hector, who, however, is not uſed to boaſt, ſay to Achilles, in an interview between them; and which, applied to this watchful Lady, and to the vexation ſhe has given me, and to the certainty I now think I have of ſubduing her; will run thus:—Suppoſing the charmer before me; and I meditating her ſweet perſon from head to foot:Henceforth,O watchful fair one,guard thee well:For I'll not kill thee There! nor There! nor There!But, by thezone that circles Venus' waiſt,I'll kill thee Ev'ry-where; yea, o'er and o'er,Thou, wiſeſtBelford,pardon me this brag:Her watchfulneſsdraws folly from my lips;But I'll endeavourdeedsto match thewords,Or may I never—Then, I imagine thee interpoſing to qualify my impatience, as Ajax did to Achilles:—Do not chafe thee, couſin:—And let theſe threats alone,Tillaccidentorpurpoſebring thee to it. 

And now, Jack, what doſt think? 

That thou art a curſed fellow, if— 

If! No If's—But I ſhall be very ſick to-morrow. I ſhall, 'faith. 

Sick!—Why ſick?—What a devil ſhouldſt thou be ſick for? 

For more good reaſons than one, Belford. 

I ſhould be glad to hear but one.—Sick, quotha! Of all thy roguiſh inventions, I ſhould not have thought of this. 

Perhaps thou thinkeſt my view to be, to draw the lady to my bedſide: That's a trick of three or four thouſand years old; and I ſhould find it much more to my purpoſe, if I could get to her's. However, I'll condeſcend to make thee as wiſe as myſelf. 

I am exceſſively diſturb'd about this ſmuggling ſcheme of Miſs Howe. I have no doubt, that my fair one will fly from me, if ſhe can, were I to make an attempt, and miſcarry. I once believed ſhe loved me: But now I doubt whether ſhe does or not: At leaſt, that it is with ſuch anardor,as Miſs Howe calls it, as will make her overlook a premeditated fault, ſhould I be guilty of one. 

And what will being ſick do for thee? 

Have patience. I don't intend to be ſo very bad as Dorcas ſhall repreſent me to be. But yet I knowI ſhall reach confoundedly, and bring up ſome clotted blood. To be ſure, I ſhall break a veſſel: There's no doubt of that; and a bottle of Eaton's ſtyptic ſhall be ſent for; but no doctor. If ſhe hashumanity,ſhe will be concerned. But if ſhe haslove,let it have been puſh'd ever ſo far back, it will, on this occaſion, come forward, and ſhew itſelf; not only in her eye, but in every line of her ſweet face. 

I will be very intrepid. I will not fear death, or any thing elſe. I will be ſure of being well in an hour or two, having formerly found great benefit by this balſamic medicine, on occaſion of an inward bruiſe by a fall from my horſe in hunting, of which, perhaps, this malady may be the remains. And this will ſhew her, that tho' thoſe about me may make the moſt of it, I don't; and ſo can have no deſign in it. 

Well, methinks thou ſayeſt, I begin to think tolerably of this device. 

I knew thou wouldſt, when I explained myſelf. Another time prepare to wonder; and baniſh doubt. 

Now, Belford, if ſhe be not much concerned at the broken veſſel, which, in one ſo fiery in his temper as I have the reputation to be thought, may be very dangerous; a malady that I ſhall calmly attribute to the haraſſes and doubts, that I have laboured under for ſome time paſt; which will be a further proof of my love, and will demand a grateful return— 

What then, thou egregious contriver? 

Why then I ſhall have the leſs remorſe, if I am to uſe a little violence: For can ſhe deſerve compaſſion, who ſhews none? 

And what if ſhe ſhew a great deal of concern? 

Then ſhall I be in hope of building on a good foundation. Love hides a multitude of faults, and diminiſhes thoſe it cannot hide. Love, when found out, or acknowleged, authorizes freedom; and freedombegets freedom; and I ſhall then ſee how far I can go. 

Well but, Lovelace, how the duce wilt thou, with that full health and vigour of conſtitution, and with that bloom in thy face, make any-body believe thou art ſick? 

How!—Why take a few grains of Ipecacuanha; enough to make me reach like a fury. 

Good!—But how wilt thou manage to bring up blood, and not hurt thyſelf? 

Fooliſh fellow! Are there not pigeons and chickens in every poulterer's ſhop? 

Cry thy mercy. 

But then I will be perſuaded by Mrs. Sinclair, that I have of late confined myſelf too much; and ſo will have a chair called, and be carried to the Park; where I will try to walk half the length of the Mall, or ſo; and in my return, amuſe myſelf at White's or the Cocoa. 

And what will this do? 

Queſtioning again?—I am afraid thou'rt an infidel, Belford.—Why then ſhall I not know if my beloved offers to go out in my abſence?—And ſhall I not ſe•whether ſhe receives me with tenderneſs at my return? But this is not all: I have a foreboding that ſomething affecting will happen while I am out. But of this more in its place. 

And now, Belford, wilt thou, or wilt thou not, allow, that it is a right thing to be ſick?—Lord, Jack, ſo much delight do I take in my contrivances, that I ſhall be half-ſorry, when the occaſion for them is over; for never, never ſhall I again have ſuch charming exerciſe for my invention. 

Mean time theſe plaguy women are ſo impertinent, ſo full of reproaches, that I know not how to do any thing but curſe them. And then, truly, they are for helping me out with ſome of their trite and vulgar artifices.—Sally particularly; who pretends to be a mighty contriver, has juſt now, in an inſolent manner,told me, on my rejecting her proffer'd aids, that I had no mind to conquer; and that I was ſowickedas to intend to marry, tho' I would not own it to her. 

Becauſe this little devil made her firſt ſacrifice at my altar, ſhe thinks ſhe may take any liberty with me: And what makes her outrageous at times, is, that I have, for a long time,ſtudiouſly,as ſhe ſays, ſlighted her too readily offer'd favours: But is it not very impudent in her to think, that I will be any man's ſucceſſor? It is not come to that neither. This, thou knoweſt, was always my rule—Once any other man's,andIknow it, andnever more mine.It is for ſuch as thou, and thy brethren, to take up withharlots.I have been always aiming at the merit of a firſt diſcoverer. 

The more devil I, perhaps thou'lt ſay, to endeavour to corrupt the uncorrupted. 

But I ſay,Not; ſince, hence, I have but very few adulteries to anſwer for. 

One affair, indeed, at Paris, with a married lady [I believe I never told thee of it] touched my conſcience a little: Yet brought on by the ſpirit of intrigue, more than by ſheer wickedneſs. I'll give it thee in brief: 

'A French marquis, ſomewhat in years, employ'd by his court in a public function at that of Madrid, had put his charming, young, new-married wife under the controul andwardſhip,as I may ſay, of his inſolent ſiſter, an old prude. 

'I ſaw the lady at the opera. I liked her at firſt ſight, and better at ſecond, when I knew the ſituation ſhe was in. So, pretending to make my addreſſes to the prude, got admittance to both. 

'The firſt thing I had to do, was, to compliment my prude into ſhyneſs, by complaints of ſhyneſs: Next to take advantage of the marquiſe's ſituation, between her huſband's jealouſy, and his ſiſter's arrogance, to inſpire her with reſentment; and, as Ihoped, with a regard to my perſon. The Frenc•ladies have no diſlike to intrigue. 

'The ſiſter began to ſuſpect me: The lady had no mind to part with the company of the only man who had been permitted to viſit there; and told me of her ſiſter's ſuſpicions.—I put her upon concealing the prude, as if unknown to me, in a cloſet in one of her own apartments, locking her in, and putting the key in her own pocket; And ſhe was to queſtion me on the ſincerity of my profeſſions to her ſiſter, in her ſiſter's hearing. 

'She comply'd. My miſtreſs was locked up. The lady and I took our ſeats. I owned fervent love, and made high profeſſions: For the marquiſe put it home to me. The prude was delighted with what ſhe heard. 

'And how doſt think it ended?—I took my advantage of the lady herſelf, who durſt not for her life cry out: Drew her after me to the next apartment, on pretence of going to ſeek her ſiſter, who all the time was locked up in the cloſet. 

'No woman ever gave me a private meeting for nothing; my deareſt Miſs Harlowe excepted. 

'My ingenuity obtained my pardon: The lady being unable to forbear laughing thro' the whole affair, to find both ſo uncommonly tricked; her gaolereſs her priſoner, ſafe locked up, and as much pleaſed as either of us. 

'The Engliſh, Jack, do not often outwit the French. 

'We had contrivances afterwards equally ingenious, in which the lady, the ice once broken [once ſubdued, always ſubdued], co-operated—But a more tender tell-tale revealed the ſecret—Revealed it, before the marquis could come to cover the diſgrace. The ſiſter was inveterate; the huſband irreconcileable; in every reſpect unfit for a huſband, even for aFrenchone—made, perhaps, more delicate totheſe particulars by the cuſtoms of a people among whom he was then reſident▪ſo contrary to thoſe of his own countrymen. She was obliged to throw herſelf into my protection—Nor thought herſelf unhappy in it, till childbed pangs ſeized her: Then penitence, and death, overtook her in the ſame hour!' 

Excuſe a tear, Belford!—She deſerv'd a better fate! What has ſuch a vile inexorable huſband to anſwer for!—The ſiſter was puniſhed effectually! That pleaſes me on reflection! The ſiſter was puniſh'd effectually!—But perhaps I have told thee this ſtory before. 

LETTER XXXV. Mr.LOVELACE,ToJOHN BELFORD,Eſq
Friday Evening.JUST returned from an airing with my charmer▪comply'd with after great importunity. She wa•attended by the two nymphs. They both topp'd their parts; kept their eyes within bounds; made moral reflections now-and-then. O Jack! what devils are women, when all teſts are got over, and we have completely ruin'd them! 

The coach carried us to Hamſtead, to Highgate, to Muzzle-hill; back to Hamſtead to the Upper-Flaſk▪There, in compliment to the nymphs, my beloved conſented to alight, and take a little refection. Then home early by Kentiſh Town. 

Delightfully eaſy ſhe: And ſo reſpectful and obliging I, all the way, and as we walk'd out upon the Heath, to view the variegated proſpects, which that agreeable elevation affords, that ſhe promiſed to take now-and-then a little excurſion with me. I think, Miſs Howe—Ithink,ſaid I to myſelf, every now-and-then as we walked, that thy wicked devices are ſuperſeded, 

We have both been writing ever ſince we cam•home. I am to be favoured with her company•an hour, before ſhe retires to reſt. 

All that obſequious love can ſuggeſt, in order to engage her tendereſt ſentiments for me againſt to-morrow's ſickneſs, will I aim at when we meet. But at parting will complain of a diſorder in my ſtomach. 

WE have met. All was love and unexceptionable reſpect on my part. Eaſe and complaiſance on hers. She was concerned for my diſorder. So ſudden!—Juſt as we parted. But it was nothing. I ſhould be quite well by morning. 

Faith, Jack, I think I am ſick already!—Is it poſſible for ſuch a giddy fellow as me to perſuade myſelf to be ill? I am a better mimic at this rate than I wiſh to be. But every nerve and fibre of me is always ready to contribute its aid, whether by health or by ailment, to carry a reſolved on roguery into execution. 

Dorcas has tranſcribed for me the whole letter of Miſs How, dated Sunday May 14.Letterx.of this Vol. p.37., of which before I had only extracts. But ſhe found no other letter added to that parcel. But this, and that which I copy'd myſelf in character laſt Sunday while ſhe was at church, relating to the ſmuggling ſchemeLetterxxii▪p.10•., are enough for me. 

DORCAS tells me, that her lady has been removing her papers from the mahogany-cheſt into a wainſcot•ox, which held her linen, and which ſhe put into her dark cloſet. We have no key of that at preſent. No doubt but all her letters, previous to thoſe I have c•me at, are in that box. Dorcas is uneaſy upon it: Yet hopes that her lady does not ſuſpect her; for ſhe is ſure that ſhe laid in every thing as ſhe found it. 

LETTER XXXVI. Mr.LOVELACE,ToJOHN BELFORD,Eſq
Cocoa-tree,Saturday, May27.THIS Ipecacuanha is a moſt diſagreeable medicine▪That theſe curſed phyſical folks can find out nothing to do us good, but what would poiſon the devil▪In the other world, were they only to take phyſic, it would be puniſhment enough of itſelf for a miſ-ſpent life. A doctor at one elbow, and an apothecary at the other, and the poor ſoul labouring under their preſcribed operations, he need no worſe tormentors. 

But now this was to take down my countenance. It has done it: For, with violent reachings, having taken enough to make me ſick, and not enough water to carry it off, I preſently looked as if I had kept my bed a fortnight.Ill-jeſting,as I thought in the midſt of the exerciſe,with edge-tools,and worſe withphyſical ones. 

Two hours it held me. I had forbid Dorcas to let my beloved know any thing of the matter; out of tenderneſs to her; being willing, when ſhe knew my prohibition, to let her ſee that Iexpectedher to be concerned for me:—What a worthleſs fellow muſthebe, whoſe own heart gives him up, as deſerving of no one's regard! 

Well, but Dorcas nevertheleſs is awoman,and ſhe canwhiſperto her lady the ſecret ſhe is injoin'd to keep! 

Come hither, you toad (ſick as a devil at the inſtant); Let me ſee what a mixture of grief and ſurprize may be beat up together in thy pudden-face. 

That won't do. That dropt jaw, and mouth d•ſtended into the long oval, is more upon the Horrible, than the Grievous. 

Nor that pinking and winking with thyodious eyes,as my charmer once called them. 

A little betterThat; yet not quite right: But keep your mouth cloſer. You have a muſcle or two which you have no command of, between your cheek-bone and your lips, that ſhould carry one corner of your mouth up towards your crows-foot, and that down to meet it. 

There! Begone! Be in a plaguy hurry running up ſtairs and down, to fetch from the dining-room what you carry up on purpoſe to fetch, till motion extraordinary put you out of breath, and give you the ſigh-natural. 

What's the matter, Dorcas? 

Nothing, Madam. 

My beloved wonders ſhe has not ſeen me this morning, no doubt; but is too ſhy to ſay ſhe wonders. Repeated What's the matter's, however, as Dorcas runs up and down ſtairs by her door, bring on, Oh! Madam,! my maſter!—my maſter! 

What! How! When!—And all the monoſyllables of ſurprize. 

[Within parentheſis let me tell thee, that I have often thought, that the little words in the republic of letters, like the little folks in a nation, are the moſt ſignificant. Thetriſyllables,and therumblersof ſyllables more thanthree,are but the good for littlemagnates.] 

I muſt not tell you, Madam—My maſter ordered me not to tell you—But he is in a worſe way than he thinks for!—But he would not haveyoufrighted. 

High concern took poſſeſſion of every ſweet feature. She pity'd me!—By my ſoul, ſhe pity'd me! 

Where is he? 

Too much in a hurry for good manners [Another parentheſis, Jack! Good manners are ſo little natural, that we ought to becompos'dto obſerve them: Politeneſs will not live in a ſtorm], I cannot ſtay to anſwer queſtions, cries the wench—tho' deſirous to anſwer [A third parentheſis—Like the people cryingproclamations, running away from the cuſtomers they want to ſell to]. This hurry puts the lady in a hurry to aſk [A fourth, by way of embelliſhing the third!] as the other does the people in a hurry to buy. And I have in my eye now a whole ſtreet raiſed, and running after a proclamation or expreſs crier, as if the firſt was a thief, the other his purſuers. 

At laſt, O Lord! let Mrs. Lovelace know!—There is danger, to be ſure! whiſper'd from one nymph to another, in her hearing; but at the door, and ſo loud, that my liſtening fair one might hear. 

Out ſhe darts.—As how! as how, Dorcas! 

O Madam—A vomiting of blood! A veſſel broke, to be ſure! 

Down ſhe haſtens; finds every one as buſy over my blood in the entry, as if it were that of the Neapolitan ſaint. 

In ſteps my charmer! with a face of ſweet concern. 

How do you,Mr. Lovelace? 

O my beſt love!—Very well!—Very well!—Nothing at all! Nothing of conſequence!—I ſhall be well in an inſtant!—ſtraining again; for I was indeed plaguy ſick, tho' no more blood came. 

In ſhort, Belford, I have gain'd my end. I ſee the dear ſoul loves me. I ſee ſhe forgives me all that's paſt. I ſee I have credit for a new ſcore. 

Miſs Howe, I defy thee, my dear—Mrs. Townſend!—Who the devil are you?—Troop away with your contrabands. No ſmuggling! Nor ſmuggler, but myſelf! Nor will the choiceſt of my fair one's favours be long prohibited goods to me! 

EVERY one now is ſure, that ſhe loves me. Tears were in her eyes more than once for me. She ſuffer'd me to take her hand, and kiſs it as often as I pleaſed. On Mrs. Sinclair's mentioning, that I too much confin'd myſelf, ſhe preſſed me to take an airing; but obligingly deſired me to be careful of myſelf.Wiſh'd I would adviſe with a phyſician.God made phyſicians,ſhe ſaid. 

I did not think That, Jack. God indeed made us All. But I fanſy ſhe meantphyſicinſtead ofphyſicians; and then the phraſe might mean what the vulgar phraſe means;—God ſends meat, the devil cooks. 

I was well already, on taking the ſtyptic fromherdear hands. 

On her requiring me to take the air, I aſked, If I might have the honour of her company in a coach; and This, that I might obſerve if ſhe had an intention of going out in my abſence. 

If ſhe thought a chair were not a more proper vehicle for my caſe, ſhe would with all her heart! 

There's a precious! 

I kiſs'd her hand again! She was all goodneſs!—Would to Heaven I better deſerv'd it, I ſaid!—But all were golden days before us!—Her preſence and generous concern had done every thing. I was well! Nothing ailed me. But ſince my beloved will have it ſo, I'll take a little airing!—Let a chair be called!—O my charmer!—were I to have owed this indiſpoſition to my late haraſſes, and to the uneaſineſs I have had for diſobliging you; all is infinitely compenſated by your goodneſs!—All the art of healing is in your ſmiles!—Your late diſpleaſure was the only malady! 

While Mrs. Sinclair, and Dorcas, and Polly, and even poor ſilly Mabell (for Sally went out, as my angel came in), with uplifted hands and eyes, ſtood thanking Heaven that I was better, in audible whiſpers: See the power of love, cry'd one!—What a charming huſband, another!—Happy couple, all! 

O how the dear creature's cheek mantled!—How her eyes ſparkled!—How ſweetly acceptable is praiſe to conſcious merit, while it but reproaches when apply'd to the undeſerving!—What a new, what a gay creation it makes at once in a diffident or diſpirited heart!— 

And now, Belford, was it not worth while to be ſick? And yet I muſt tell thee, that too many pleaſanter expedients offer themſelves, to make trial any more of this confounded Ipecacuanha. 

LETTER XXXVII. MiſsCLARISSA HARLOWE,To MiſsHOWE.
Saturday, May27.MR. Lovelace, my dear, has been very ill. Suddenly taken. With a vomiting of blood in great quantities. Some veſſel broken. He complained of a diſorder in his ſtomach over-night. I was the more affected with it, as I am afraid it was occaſioned by the violent contentions between us.—But was I in fault? 

How lately did I think I hated him!—But hatred and anger, I ſee, are but temporary paſſions with me. One cannot, my dear, hate people in danger of death, or who are in diſtreſs or affliction. My heart, I find, is not proof againſt kindneſs, and acknowlegement of errors committed. 

He took great care to have his illneſs concealed from me as long as it could. So tender in the violence of his diſorder!—So deſirous to make the beſt of it!—I wiſh he had not been ill in my ſight. I was too much affected—Every-body alarming me with his danger—The poor man, from ſuch high health ſoſuddenlytaken!—And ſo unprepared!— 

He is gone out in a chair. I adviſed him to do ſo. I fear that my advice was wrong; ſince Quiet in ſuch a diſorder muſt needs be beſt. We are apt to be ſo ready, in caſes of emergency, to give our advice, without judgment, or waiting for it!—I propoſed a phyſician indeed; but he would not hear of one. I have great honour for the faculty; and the greater, as I have always obſerved, that thoſe who treat theprofeſſors of the art of healing contemptuouſly, too generally treat higher inſtitutions in the ſame manner. 

I am really very uneaſy. For I have, I doubt, expoſed myſelf to him, and to the women below.Theyindeed will excuſe me, as they think us married. But if he be not generous, I ſhall have cauſe to regret this ſurprize; which has taught me more than I knew of myſelf; as I had reaſon to think myſelf unaccountably treated by him. 

Nevertheleſs let me tell you (what I hope I may juſtly tell you, that if again he give me cauſe to reſume diſtance and reſerve, I hope my reaſon will gather ſtrength enough from his imperfections (for Mr. Lovelace, my dear, is not a wiſe man in all his ways) to enable me to keep my paſſions under.—What can we do more than govern ourſelves by the temporary lights lent us? 

You will not wonder that I am grave on this detection—Detection,muſt I call it? What can I call it?—I have not had heart's-eaſe enough, to inſpect that heart as I ought. 

Diſſatisfied with myſelf, I am afraid to look back upon what I have written. And yet know not how to have done writing. I never was in ſuch an odd frame of mind.—I know not how to deſcribe it.—Wasyoueverſo?—Afraid of the cenſure of her I love—Yet not conſcious that I deſerve it. 

Of this, however, I am convinced, that I ſhouldindeeddeſerve cenſure, if I kept any ſecret of my heart from you. 

But I will not add another word, after I have aſſured you, that I will look ſtill more narrowly into myſelf: And that I am 

Your equally ſincere and affectionateCLARISSA HARLOWE.LETTER XXXVIII. Mr.LOVELACE,ToJOHN BELFORD,Eſq
Sat. evening.I Had a charming airing. No return of my malady. My heart perfectly eaſy, how could my ſtomach be otherwiſe? 

But when I came home, I found that my ſweet ſoul had been alarmed by a new incident. The inquiry after us both, in a very ſuſpicious manner, and that by deſcription of our perſons, and not by names, by a ſervant in a blue livery turned up and trimmed with yellow. 

Dorcas was called to him, as the upper ſervant, and ſhe refuſing to anſwer any of his queſtions, unleſs he told his buſineſs, and from whom he came, the fellow, as ſhort as ſhe, ſaid, That if ſhe would not anſwerhim,perhaps ſhe might anſwer ſomebodyelſe; and went away out of humour. 

Dorcas hurried up to her lady, and alarmed her not only with the fact, but with her own conjectures; adding, that he was an ill-looking fellow, and ſhe was ſure could come for no good. 

The livery and the features of the ſervant were particularly inquired after, and as particularly deſcribed—Lord bleſs her! no end of her alarms, ſhe thought!And then was ſhe aforehand with every evil that could happen. 

She wiſhed Mr. Lovelace would come in. 

Mr. Lovelace came in ſoon after; all lively, grateful, full of hopes, of duty, of love, to thank his charmer, and to congratulate with her upon the cure ſhe had performed. And then ſhe told the ſtory, with all its circumſtances; and Dorcas, to point her lady's fears, told us, that the ſervant was a ſun-burnt fellow, and looke as if he had been at ſea. 

He was then, no doubt, Captain Singleton's ſervant, and the next news ſhe ſhould hear, was, th•the houſe was ſurrounded by a whole ſhip's crew; th•veſſel lying no farther off, as ſhe underſtood, than Rotherhith. 

Impoſſible, I ſaid. Such an attempt would not be uſher'd in by ſuch a manner of inquiry. And why may it not rather be a ſervant of your couſin Morden's, with notice of his arrival, and of his deſign to attend you? 

This ſurmize delighted her. Her apprehenſions went off, and ſhe was at leiſure to congratulate me upon my ſudden recovery; which ſhe did in the moſt obliging manner. 

But we had not ſat long together, when Dorcas again came fluttering up to tell us, that the footman, theveryfootman, was again at the door, and inquired, whether Mr. Lovelace and his Lady, by name, had no•lodgings in this houſe? He aſked, he told Dorcas, for no harm: But this was a demonſtration with my apprehenſive fair-one, that harm was intended. And as the ſellow had not been anſwered by Dorcas, I propoſed to go down to the ſtreet-parlour, and hear what he had to ſay. 

I ſee your cauſeleſs terror, my deareſt life, ſaid I, and your impatience—Will you be pleaſed to walk down—And without being obſerved, as he ſhall come no farther than the parlour-door, you may hear all that paſſes? 

She conſented. We went down. Dorcas bid the man come forward.—Well, friend, what is your buſineſs with Mr. or Mrs. Lovelace? 

Bowing, ſcraping, I am ſure you are the gentleman, Sir. Why, Sir, my buſineſs is only to know if your honour be here, and to be ſpoke with; or it you ſhall be here for any time? 

Who came you from? 

From a gentleman who ordered me to ſay, if I wasmadeto tell, but not elſe, it was from a friend of Mr. John Harlowe's, Mrs. Lovelace's eldeſt uncle. 

The dear creature was ready to ſink upon this. It was but of late, that ſhe had provided herſelf with ſalts. She pulled them out. 

Do you know any thing of Colonel Morden, friend, ſaid I? 

No; I never heard of his name. 

Of Captain Singleton? 

No, Sir. But the gentleman, my maſter, is a captain too. 

What is his name? 

I don't know if I ſhould tell. 

There can be no harm in telling the gentleman's name, if you come upon a good account. 

That I do; for my maſter told me ſo; and there is not an honeſter gentleman on the face ofGod's earth.—His name is Captain Tomlinſon, Sir. 

I don't know ſuch a one. 

I believe not, Sir. He was pleaſed to ſay, He don't know your honour, Sir; but I heard him ſay, as how he ſhould not be an unwelcome viſitor to you, for all that. 

Do you know ſuch a man as Captain Tomlinſon, my deareſt life,aſide,your uncle's friend? 

No; but my uncle may have acquaintance, no doubt, that I don't know.—But I hope, trembling, this is not a trick. 

Well, friend, if your maſter has any thing to ſay to Mr. Lovelace, you may tell him, that Mr. Lovelace is here; and will give him a meeting whenever he pleaſes. 

The dear creature looked as if afraid that my engagement was too prompt for my own ſafety; and away went the fellow.—Iwondering, thatſhemight not wonder, that this Captain Tomlinſon, whoever he was, came not himſelf, or ſent not a letter the ſecond time, when he had reaſon to ſuppoſe that I might be here. 

Mean time, for fear that this ſhould be a contriveance of James Harlowe's, who, I ſaid, loved plotting, though he had not a head turned for it, I gave ſome precautionary directions to the ſervants, and the women, whom, for the greater parade, I aſſembled before us: And my beloved was reſolved not to ſtir abroad till ſhe ſaw the iſſue of this odd affair. 

And here muſt I cloſe though in ſo great a puzzle. 

Only let me add, that poor Belton wants thee; for I dare not ſtir for my life. 

Mowbray and Tourville ſkulk about like vagabonds, without heads, without hands, without ſouls; having neither Thee nor Me to conduct them. They tell me, they ſhall ruſt beyond the power of oil or action to brighten them up, or give them motion. 

How goes it with thy uncle? 

LETTER XXXIX. Mr.LOVELACE,ToJOHN BELFORD,Eſq
Sunday, May28THIS ſtory of Captain Tomlinſon employed us not only for the time we were together laſt night, but all the while we ſat at breakfaſt this morning. She would ſtill have it, that it was the prelude to ſome miſchief from Singleton. I inſiſted, that it might much more probably be a method taken by Colonel Morden to alarm her, previous to a perſonal viſit. Travelled gentlemen affected to ſurprize in this manner. And why, deareſt creature, ſaid I, muſt every thing that happens, which we cannot immediately account for, be what we leaſt wiſh? 

She had had ſo many diſagreeable things befal her of late, that her fears were too often ſtronger than her hopes. 

And this, Madam, makes me apprehenſive, that you will get into ſo low-ſpirited a way, that you willnot be able to enjoy the happineſs that ſeems to await us. 

Her duty and her gratitude, ſhe gravely ſaid, to the Diſpenſer of all good, would ſecure her, ſhe hoped, againſt unthankfulneſs. And a thankful ſpirit was the ſame as a joyful one. 

So, Belford, for all her future joys ſhe depends intirely upon the Inviſible Good. She is certainly right; ſince thoſe who fix leaſt upon Second Cauſes are the leaſt likely to be diſappointed—And is not this gravity for her gravity? 

She had hardly done ſpeaking, when Dorcas came running up in a hurry—She ſet evenmyheart into a palpitation—Thump, thump, thump, like a precipitated pendulum in a clock-caſe—Flutter, flutter, flutter my charmer's, as by her ſweet boſom riſing to her chin I ſaw. 

This lower claſs of people, my Beloved herſelf obſerved, were for ever aiming at the ſtupid Wonderful, and for making even common incidents matter of ſurprize. 

Why the devil, ſaid I to the wench, this alarming hurry?—And with your ſpread fingers, and your O Madams, and O Sirs!—and be curs'd to you: Would there have been a ſecond of time difference, had you come up ſlowly? 

Captain Tomlinſon, Sir! 

Captain Devilſon, what care I!—Do you ſee how you have diſordered your lady? 

Good Mr. Lovelace, ſaid my charmer, trembling, See, Jack, when ſhe has an end to ſerve, I amgoodMr. Lovelace] If—if my brother,—if Captain Single•on ſhould appear—Pray now—I beſeech you—Let me beg of you—to govern your temper—My brother is my brother—Captain Singleton is but an•gent. 

My deareſt life, folding my arms about her [Whenſhe aſks favours, thought I, the devil's in it, if ſhe will not allow of ſuch innocent freedoms as this, fromgoodMr. Lovelace too], you ſhall be witneſs of all that paſſes between us. Dorcas, deſire the gentleman to walk up. 

Let me retire to my chamber firſt! Let me not be known to be in the houſe! 

Charming dear!—Thou ſeeſt, Belford, ſhe is afraid of leaving me!—O the little witchcrafts! Were it not for ſurprize now-and-then, how would an honeſt man know where to have them? 

She withdrew to liſten—And tho' this incident has not turned out to anſwer all I wiſh'd from it, yet is it neceſſary, if I would acquaint thee with my whole circulation, to be very particular in what paſſed between Captain Tomlinſon and me. 

Enter Captain Tomlinſon in a riding-dreſs, whip in hand. 

Your ſervant, Sir—Mr. Lovelace, I preſume? 

My name is Lovelace, Sir. 

Excuſe the Day, Sir.—Be pleaſed to excuſe my Garb. I am obliged to go out of town directly, that I may return at night. 

The Day is a good day. Your Garb needs no apology. 

When I ſent my ſervant, I did not know that I ſhouldfind time to do myſelf this honour.All that I thought I could do to oblige my friend this journey, wasonlyto aſſure myſelf of your abode; and whether there was a probability of being admitted to your ſpeech, or to your Lady's. 

Sir, you know beſt your own motives. What your time will permit you to do, you alſo beſt know. And here I am, attending your pleaſure. 

My charmer owned afterwards her concern on my being ſo ſhort. Whatever I ſhall mingle of her em•tions, thou wilt eaſily gueſs I had afterwards. 

Sir, I hope no offence. I intend none. 

None—None at all, Sir. 

Sir, I have no intereſt in the affair I come about. I may appear officious; and if I thought I ſhould, I would decline any concern in it, after I have juſt hinted what it is. 

And what, pray, Sir, is it? 

May I aſk you, Sir, without offence, whether you wiſh to be reconciled, and to co-operate upon honourable terms, withonegentleman of the name of Harlowe; preparative, as it may be hoped, to a general reconciliation? 

O how my heart flutter'd,cried my charmer! 

I can't tell, Sir [And then it flutter'd ſtill more, no doubt]: The whole family have uſed me extremely ill. They have taken greater liberties with my character than are juſtifiable, and with my familytoo; which I can leſs forgive. 

Sir, Sir, I have done. I beg pardon for this intruſion. 

My Beloved then was ready to ſink, and thought very hardly of me. 

But pray, Sir, to the immediate purpoſe of your preſent commiſſion; ſince a commiſſion it ſeems to be? 

Itisa commiſſion, Sir; and-ſuch a one, as I thought would be agreeable to all parties, or I ſhould not have given myſelf concern about it. 

Perhaps itmay,Sir, when known. But let me aſk you one previous queſtion? Do you know Colonel Morden, Sir? 

No, Sir. If you meanperſonally,I do not. But I have heard my good friend Mr. John Harlowe talk of him with great reſpect; and as a co-truſtee with him in a certain truſt. 

I thought it probable, Sir, ſaid I, that the Colonel might be arrived; that you might be a gentleman ofhis acquaintance; and that ſomething of an agreeable ſurprize might be intended. 

Had Colonel Morden been in England, Mr. John Harlowe would have known it; and then I ſhould not have been a ſtranger to it. 

Well but, Sir, have you then any commiſſion to me from Mr. John Harlowe? 

Sir, I will tell you, as briefly as I can, the whole of what I have to ſay; but you'll excuſemealſo a previous queſtion, for which curioſity is not my motive; but it is neceſſary to be anſwered before I can proceed; as you will judge when you hear it. 

What, pray, Sir, is your queſtion? 

Briefly, Whether you are actually, andbona fide,married to Miſs Clariſſa Harlowe? 

I ſtarted, and, in a haughty tone, Is this, Sir, a queſtion thatmuſtbe anſwered before you can proceed in the buſineſs you have undertaken? 

I mean no offence, Mr. Lovelace. Mr. Harlowe ſought to me to undertake this office. I have daughters and nieces of my own. I thought it a good office, or I, who have many conſiderable affairs upon my hands, had not accepted of it. I know the world; and will take the liberty to ſay, That if that young Lady— 

Captain Tomlinſon, I think you are called? 

My name is Tomlinſon. 

Why then, Captain Tomlinſon, noliberty,as you call it, will be taken well, that is not extremely delicate, when that lady is mentioned. 

When you had heard me out, Mr. Lovelace, and had found, I had ſo behaved, as to make the caution neceſſary, it would have been juſt to have given it.—Allow me to ſay, I know what is due to the character of a woman of virtue, as well as any man alive. 

Why, Sir! Why, Captain Tomlinſon, you ſeem warm. If you intend any-thing by this [O how I trembled!ſaid the Lady,when ſhe took notice of thispart of our converſation afterwards:], I will only ſay, that this is a privileged place. It is at preſent my home, and an aſylum for any gentleman who thinks it worth his while to inquire after me, be the manner or end of his inquiry what it will. 

I know not, Sir, that I have given occaſion for this. I make no ſcruple to attend youelſewhere,if I am troubleſome here. I was told, I had a warm young gentleman to deal with: But as I knew my intention, and that my commiſſion was an amicable one, I was the leſs concerned about that. I am twice your age, Mr. Lovelace, I dare ſay: But I do aſſure you, that if either my meſſage, or my manner, give you offence, I can ſuſpend the one or the other for a day, or for ever, as you like. And ſo, Sir, any time before eight to-morrow morning, you will let me know your further commands.—And was going to tell me where he might be found. 

Captain Tomlinſon, ſaid I, you anſwer well. I love a man of ſpirit. Have you not been in the army? 

I have, Sir; but haveturned my ſword into a ploughſhare,as the Scripture has it [There was a clever fellow, Jack!—He was a good man with ſomebody, I warrant!].—And all my delight, added he, for ſome years paſt, has been in cultivating my paternal eſtate. I love a brave man, Mr. Lovelace, as well as ever I did in my life. But, let me tell you, Sir, that when you come to my time of life, you will be of opinion, that there is not ſo much true bravery in youthful choler, as you may now think there is. 

A clever fellow again, Belford—Ear and heart, both at once, he took in my charmer.—'Tis well,ſhe ſays,there are ſome men who have wiſdom in their anger. 

Well, Captain, that is reproof for reproof. So we are upon a foot. And now give me the pleaſure of hearing your commiſſion. 

Sir, you muſt firſt allow me to repeat my queſtion:Are you really, andbona fide,married to Miſs Clariſſa Harlowe? Or are you not yet married? 

Bluntly put, Captain. But if I anſwer that Iam,what then? 

Why then, Sir, I ſhall ſay, that you are a man of honour. 

That I hope I am, whether youſayit or not, Captain Tomlinſon. 

Sir, I will be very frank in all I have to ſay on this ſubject.—Mr. John Harlowe has lately found out, that you and his niece are both in the ſame lodgings; that you have been long ſo; and that the lady was at the Play with you yeſterday was ſe'ennight; and he hopes, that you are actually married: He has indeed heard that you are; but, as he knows your enterprizing temper, and that you have declared, that you diſdain a relation to their family, he is willing by me to have your marriage confirmed from your own mouth, before he takes the ſteps he is inclined to take in his niece's favour. You will allow me to ſay, Mr. Lovelace, that he will not be ſatisfied with an anſwer that admits of the leaſt doubt. 

Let me tell you, Captain Tomlinſon, that it is a damn'd degree of vileneſs for any man to ſuppoſe— 

Sir—Mr. Lovelace—don't put yourſelf into a paſſion. The Lady's relations are jealous of the honour of their family. They have prejudices to overcome as well as you—Advantage may have been taken—and the Lady, at thetime,not to blame. 

This Lady, Sir, could give no ſuch advantages: And if ſhehad,what muſt themanbe, Captain Tomlinſon, who could have taken them?—Do you know the Lady, Sir? 

I never had the honour to ſee her but once; and that was at church; and ſhould not know her again. 

Not know her again, Sir!—I thought that there was not a man living who had once ſeen her, and would not know her among a thouſand. 

I remember, Sir, that I thought I never ſaw a finer woman in my life. But, Mr. Lovelace, I believe, you will allow, that it is better that her relations ſhould have wrongedyou,than you theLady.I hope, Sir, you will permit me to repeat my queſtion. 

Enter Dorcas, in a hurry. 

Agentleman,this minute, Sir, deſires to ſpeak with your honour—My Lady, Sir!—[Aſide. 

Could the dear creature putDorcasupon telling this fib, yet want to ſavemeone?— 

Deſire the gentleman to walk into one of the parlours. I will wait on him preſently. 

[Exit Dorcas. 

The dear creature, I doubted not, wanted to inſtruct me how to anſwer the Captain's home-put. I knew how I intended to anſwer it—Plumb▪thou may'ſt be ſure—But Dorcas's meſſage ſtagger'd me. And yet I was upon one of my maſter-ſtrokes—Which was, To take advantage of the Captain's inquiries, and to make her own her marriage before him, as ſhe had done to the people below; and if ſhe had been brought to that, to induce her, for her uncle's ſatisfaction, to write him a letter of gratitude; which of courſe muſt have been ſignedClariſſa Lovelace.I was loth, therefore, thou may'ſt believe, to attend her ſudden commands: And yet, afraid of puſhing matters beyond recovery with her, I thought proper to lead him from the queſtion, to account for himſelf; for Mr. Harlowe's coming at the knowlege of where we are; and for other particulars which I knew would engage her attention; and which might poſſibly convince her of the neceſſity there was for her to acquieſce in the affirmative I was diſpoſed to give. And this for her own ſake; for what; as I aſked her afterwards, is it to me, whether I am ever reconciled to a family I muſt for ever deſpiſe? 

You think, Captain, that I have anſwered doubtfully to the queſtion you have put. Youmaythink ſo. And you muſt know, that I have a good deal of pride: And only, that you are a gentleman, and ſeem in this affair to be governed by generous principles, or I ſhould ill brook being interrogated as to my honour to a lady ſo dear to me.—But before I anſwer more directly to the point, pray ſatisfy me in a queſtion or two that I ſhall put toyou. 

With all my heart, Sir. Aſk me what queſtions you pleaſe, I will anſwer them with ſincerity and candour. 

You ſay, That Mr. Harlowe has found out that we were at a Play together: And that we are both in the ſame lodgings—How pray, came he at his knowlege?—For, let me tell you, that I have, for certain conſiderations not reſpecting myſelf, condeſcended, that our abode ſhould be kept ſecret. And this has been ſo ſtrictly obſerved, that even Miſs Howe, tho' ſhe and my beloved correſpond, knows not directly whither to ſend to us. 

Why, Sir, the perſon who ſaw you at the Play, was a tenant of Mr. John Harlowe. He watched all your motions. When the Play was done, he followed your coach to your lodgings. And early the next day, Sunday, he took horſe, and acquainted his landlord with what he had obſerved. 

How oddly things come about, Captain Tomlinſon!—But does any other of the Harlowes know where we are? 

It is an abſolute ſecret to every other perſon of the family; and ſo it is intended to be kept: As alſo that Mr. John Harlowe is willing to enter into treaty with you, by me, if his niece be actually married; for perhaps he is aware, that he ſhall have difficulty enough with ſome people to bring about the deſirablereconciliation, altho' he could give them this aſſurance. 

I doubt it not, Captain.—To James Harlowe is all the family folly owing.—Fine fools! [heroically ſtalking about] to be governed by one to whom malice, and not genius, gives the buſy livelineſs that diſtinguiſhes him from a natural!—But how long, pray, Sir, has Mr. John Harlowe been in this pacific diſpoſition? 

I will tell you, Mr. Lovelace, and the occaſion; and be very explicit upon it, and upon all that concerns you to know of me, and of the commiſſion I have undertaken; and this the rather, as when you have heard me out, you will be ſatisfied, that I am not an officious man in this my preſent addreſs to you. 

I am all attention, Captain Tomlinſon. 

And ſo I doubt not was my beloved. 

'You muſt know, Sir, ſaid the Captain, that I have not been many months in Mr. John Harlowe's neighbourhood. I removed from Northamptonſhire, partly for the ſake of better managing one of two Executorſhips, which I could not avoid engaging in (the affairs of which frequently call me to town, and are part of my preſent buſineſs), and partly for the ſake of occupying a neglected farm, which has lately fallen into my hands. But tho' an acquaintance of no longer ſtanding, and that commencing on the Bowling-green [Uncle John is a great bowler, Belford] (upon my deciſion of a point to every one's ſatisfaction, which was appealed to me by all the gentlemen; and which might have been attended with bad conſequences), no two brothers have a more cordial eſteem for each other. You know, Mr. Lovelace, that there is aconſent,as I may call it, in ſome minds, which will unite them ſtronger in a few hours, than years willdo with others, whom yet we ſee not with diſguſt.' 

Very true, Captain. 

'It was on the foot of this avowed friendſhip on both ſides, that on Monday the 15th, as I very well remember, Mr. Harlowe invited himſelf home with me. And when there, he acquainted me with the whole of the unhappy affair, that had made them all ſo uneaſy. Till then I knew it only by report; for, intimate as we were, I forbore to ſpeak of what was ſo near his heart, till he began firſt. And then he told me, that he had had an application made to him two or three days before by a gentleman whom he namedSee Miſs Howe's Letters, Numb.iv.p.19.and Numb.x.p.37.of this Volume., to induce him not only to be reconciled to his niece himſelf, but to forward for her a general reconciliation. 

'A like application, he told me, had been made to his ſiſter Harlowe, by a good woman whom every-body reſpected; who had intimated, that his niece, if encouraged, would again put herſelf into the protection of her friends, and leave you: But if not, that ſhe muſt unavoidably be yours.' 

I hope, Mr. Lovelace, I make no miſchief.—You look concerned—You ſigh, Sir. 

Proceed, Captain Tomlinſon. Pray proceed.—And I ſighed ſtill more profoundly. 

'They all thought it extremely particular, that a lady ſhould decline marriage with a man ſhe had ſo lately gone away with.' 

Pray, Captain—Pray, Mr. Tomlinſon—No more of this ſubject. My beloved is an angel. In every thing unblameable. Whatever faults there have been, have been theirs and mine. What you would further ſay, is, that theunforgivingfamily rejected her application. They did. She and I had had a miſunderſtanding.The falling out of lovers—you know, Captain.—We have been happier ever ſince. 

'Well, Sir; but Mr. John Harlowe could not but better conſider the matter afterwards. And he deſired my advice how to act in it. He told me, that no father ever loved a daughter as he loved this niece of his; whom, indeed, he uſed to call hisdaughter-niece.He ſaid, ſhe had really been unkindly treated by her brother and ſiſter: And as your alliance, Sir, was far from being a diſcredit to their family, he would do his endeavour to reconcile all parties, if he could be ſure that ye were actually man and wife.' 

And what, pray, Captain, was your advice? 

'I gave it as my opinion, that if his niece were unworthily treated, and in diſtreſs, as he apprehended from the application to him, he would ſoon hear of her again: But that it was likely, that this application was made without expecting it would ſucceed; and as a ſalvo only, to herſelf, for marrying without their conſent. And the rather, as he had told me, that it came from a young lady her friend, and not in a direct way from herſelf; which young lady was no favourite of the family; and therefore would hardly have been employed, had ſucceſs been expec•ed.' 

Very well, Captain Tomlinſon.—Pray proceed. 

'Here the matter reſted till laſt Sunday evening, when Mr. John Harlowe came to me with the man who had ſeen you and your lady (as I hope ſhe is) at the Play; and who had aſſured him, that you both lodged in the ſame houſe.—And then the application having been ſo lately made, which implied, that you were not then married, he was ſo uneaſy for his niece's honour, that I adviſed him to diſpatch to town ſome one in whom he could confide, to make proper inquiries. 

Very well, Captain.—And was ſuch a perſon employed on ſuch an errand by her uncle? 

'A truſty and diſcreet perſon was accordingly ſent; and laſt Tueſday, I think it was (for he returned to us on the Wedneſday), he made the inquiries among the neighbours firſt [The very inquiry, Jack, that gave us all ſo much uneaſineſsSee p.180.of this Vol.]. But finding, that none of them could give any ſatisfactory account, the lady's woman was come at, who declared, that you were actually married. But the inquiriſt keeping himſelf on the reſerve as to his employers, the girl refuſed to tell the day, or to give him other particulars.' 

You give a very clear account of every-thing, Captain Tomlinſon. Pray go on. 

'The gentleman returned; and on his report Mr. Harlowe, having ſtill doubts, and being willing to proceed on ſome grounds in ſo important a point, beſought me, as my affairs called me frequently to town, to undertake this matter. You, Mr. Tomlinſon, he was pleaſed to ſay, have children of your own: You know the world: You know what I drive at: You will proceed, I know, with underſtanding and ſpirit: And whatever you are ſatisfied with, ſhall ſatisfy me.' 

Enter Dorcas, again in a hurry. 

Sir, The gentleman is impatient. 

I will attend him preſently. 

The Captain then accounted for his not calling in perſon, when he had reaſon to think us here. 

He ſaid, he had buſineſs of conſequence a few miles out of town, whither he thought he muſt have gone yeſterday; and having been obliged to put off his little journey till this day, and underſtanding that we were within, not knowing whether he ſhould have ſuch another opportunity, he was willing to try hisgood fortune before he ſet out; and this made him come booted and ſpurred, as I ſaw him. 

He dropped a hint in commendation of the people of the houſe; but it was in ſuch away, as to give no room for ſuſpicion, that he thought it neceſſary to make any inquiries after the character of perſons who make ſo genteel an appearance, as he obſerved they do. 

And here let me remark, to the ſame purpoſe, that my beloved might collect another circumſtance in their favour, had ſhe doubted them, from the ſilence of her uncle's inquiriſt on Tueſday, among the neighbours. 

And now, Sir, ſaid he, that I believe I have ſatiſfied you in every thing relating to my commiſſion, I hope you will permit me to repeat my queſtion—which is,— 

Enter Dorcas again, out of breath. 

Sir, the gentleman will ſtep up toyou.—My lady is impatient. She wonders at your honour's delay, [Aſide]. 

Excuſe me, Captain, for one moment. 

I have ſtaid my full time, Mr. Lovelace.—What may reſult from my queſtion and your anſwer, whatever it ſhall be, may take us up time.—And you are engaged.—Will you permit me to attend you in the morning, before I ſet out on my return? 

You will then breakfaſt with me, Captain? 

It muſt be early if I do. I muſt reach my own houſe to-morrow night, or I ſhall make the beſt of wives unhappy. And I have two or three places to call at in my way. 

It ſhall be by ſeven o'clock, if you pleaſe, Captain. We are early folks. And this I will tell you, that if ever I am reconciled to a family ſo implacable as I have always found the Harlowes to be, it muſt be by the mediation of ſo cool and ſo moderate a gentleman as yourſelf. 

And ſo, with the higheſt civilities on both ſides, weparted. But for the private ſatisfaction of ſo good a man, I left him out of doubt, that we were man and wife, tho' I did not directly aver it. 

LETTER XL. Mr.LOVELACE,ToJOHN BELFORD,Eſq
Sunday Night.THIS Captain Tomlinſon is one of the happieſt, as well as one of the beſt men in the world. What would I give to ſtand as high in my beloved's opinion, as he does! But yet, I am as good a man as he, were I to tell my own ſtory, and have equal credit given to it. But the devil ſhould have had him before I had ſeen him on the account he came upon, had I thought I ſhould not have anſwered my principal end in it.—I hinted to thee in my laſt what that was. 

But to the particulars of the conference between my fair one, and me, on her haſty meſſages; which I was loth to come to, becauſe ſhe has had a half triumph over me in it. 

After I had attended the Captain down to the very paſſage, I returned to the dining-room, and put on a joyful air, on my beloved's entrance into it.—O my deareſt creature, let me congratulate you on a proſpect ſo agreeable to your wiſhes!—And I ſnatched her hand, and ſmothered it with my kiſſes. 

I was going on; when, interrupting me,—You ſee, Mr. Lovelace, ſaid ſhe, how you have embaraſſed yourſelf, by your own obliquities!—You ſee, that you have not been able to return a direct anſwer to a plain and honeſt queſtion, tho' upon it depends all the happineſs you congratulate me upon the proſpect of. 

You know, my beſt love, what my prudent, and I will ſay, mykindmotives were, for giving out, that we were married. You ſee, that I have takenno advantage of it; and that no inconvenience has followed it.—You ſee; that your uncle wants only to be aſſured from ourſelves, that it is ſo— 

Not another word to this purpoſe, Mr. Lovelace. I will not only riſk, but I will forfeit, the reconciliation ſo near my heart, rather than I will go on to countenance a ſtory ſo untrue! 

My deareſt ſoul—Would you have me appear— 

I would have you appear, Sir, asyou are!I am reſolved that I will appear to my uncle's friend, and to my uncle, asI am. 

For one week, my deareſt life, cannot you for one week, only till the ſettlements— 

Not for one hour, with my own conſent.—You don't know, Sir, how much I have been afflicted, that I have appeared to the people below what I am not. But my uncle, Sir, ſhall never have it to upbraid me, nor will I to upbraid myſelf, that I have wilfully paſſed myſelf upon him in falſe lights. 

What, my dear, would you have me to ſay to the Captain to-morrow morning?—I have given him room to think— 

Then put him right, Mr. Lovelace. Tell the truth. Tell him what you pleaſe of your relations favour to me: Tell him what you will about the ſettlements: And if when drawn, you will ſubmit them to his peruſal and approbation, it will ſhew him how much you are in earneſt. 

My deareſt life—Do you think, that he would diſapprove of the terms I have offer'd?—No. 

Then may I be accurſed, if I willingly ſubmit to be trampled under foot by my enemies! 

And may I, Mr. Lovelace, never be happy in this life, if I ſubmit to the paſſing upon my uncle Harlowe a wilful and premeditated falſhood for truth!—I have too long laboured under the affliction which the rejection of all my friends has given me, to purchaſetheir reconciliation now at ſo dear a price as at that of my veracity. 

The women below, my dear— 

What are they to me?—I want not to eſtabliſh myſelf with them. Need they know all that paſſes between my relations and you and me? 

Neither are they any thing to me, Madam. Only, that when, for the ſake of preventing the fatal miſchiefs which might have attended your brother's projects, I have made them think us married, I would not appear to them in a light, which you yourſelf think ſo ſhocking. By my ſoul, Madam, I had rather die, than contradict myſelf ſo flagrantly, after I have related to them ſo many circumſtances of our marriage. 

Well, Sir, the women may believe what they pleaſe. That I have given countenance to what you told them, is my error. The many circumſtances which you ownoneuntruth has drawn you in to relate, is a juſtification of my refuſal in the preſent caſe. 

Don't you ſee, Madam, that your uncle wiſhes to find us married? May not the ceremony be privately over, before his mediation can take place? 

Urge this point no farther, Mr. Lovelace. Ifyouwill not tell the truth,Iwill to-morrow morning, if I ſee Captain Tomlinſon, tell it myſelf. Indeed I will. 

Will you, Madam, conſent, that things paſs as before with the people below? This mediation of Tomlinſonmaycome to nothing. Your brother's ſchemesmaybe purſued; the rather, that now he will know (perhaps from your uncle), that you are not under a legal protection.—You will, at leaſt, conſent, that things paſshereas before? 

To permit this, is to go on in an error, Mr. Lovelace. But as the occaſion for ſo doing (if therecanbe an occaſion in your opinion, that will warrant an untruth), will, as I preſume, ſoon be over, I ſhall theleſs diſpute that point with you. But a new error I will not be guilty of, if I can avoid it. 

Can I, do you think, Madam, have any diſhonourable view in the ſtep I ſuppoſed you would not ſcruple to take towards a reconciliation with your own family?—Not formy ownſake, you know, did I hope you to take it.—For what is it to me, if I am never reconciled to your family? I want no favours from them. 

I hope, Mr. Lovelace, there is no occaſion, in our preſentnotdiſagreeable ſituation, to anſwer ſuch a queſtion. And let me ſay, that I ſhall think my proſpects ſtill more agreeable, if, to-morrow morning, you will not only own the very truth, but give my uncle's friend ſuch an account of the ſteps you have taken, and are taking, as may keep up my uncle's favourable intentions towards me. This you may do under what reſtrictions of ſecrecy you pleaſe. Captain Tomlinſon is a prudent man; a promoter of family-peace, you find; and, I dare ſay, may be made a friend. 

I ſaw there was no help. I ſaw that the inflexible Harlowe ſpirit was all up in her.—A little witch!—A little—Forgive me, Love, for calling her names: And ſo I ſaid, with an air, We have had too many miſunderſtandings, Madam, for me to wiſh for new ones; I will obey you without reſerve. Had I not thought I ſhould have obliged you by the other method (eſpecially as the ceremony might have been over, before any thing could have operated from your uncle's intentions, and of conſequence no untruth perſiſted in), I would not have propoſed it.—But think not, my beloved creature, that you ſhall enjoy, without condition, this triumph over my judgment. 

And then, claſping my arms about her, I gave her ſtruggled-away cheek (her charming lip deſigned) a ſervent kiſs.—And your forgiveneſs of this ſweet freedom (bowing) is that condition. 

She was not mortally offended.—And now muſt I make out the reſt as well as I can. But this I will tell thee, that altho' her triumph has not diminiſhed my love for her; yet has it ſtimulated me more than ever to Revenge, as thou wilt be apt to call it. But Victory or Conqueſt is the more proper name. 

There is a pleaſure, 'tis true, in ſubduing one of theſe watchful beauties. But, by my ſoul, Belford, men of our caſt take twenty times the pains to be rogues, that it would coſt them to be honeſt; and dearly, with the ſweat of our brows, and to the puzzling of our brains (to ſay nothing of the hazards we run), do we earn our purchaſe: And ought not therefore to be grudged our ſucceſs, when we meet with it—Eſpecially as, when we have obtained our end, ſatiety ſoon follows; and leaves us little or nothing to ſhew for it. But this, indeed, may be ſaid of all worldly delights.—And is not that a grave reflection from me? 

I was willing to write up to the time. Altho' I have not carried my principal point, I ſhall make ſomething turn out in my favour from Captain Tomlinſon's errand.—But let me give thee this caution; that thou do not pretend to judge of my devices byparts; but have patience till thou ſeeſt thewhole.But once more I ſwear, that I will not beout-Norris'dby a pair of novices. And yet I am very apprehenſive, at times, of the conſequences of Miſs Howe's Smuggling ſcheme. 

'Tis late, or rather early; for the day begins to dawn upon me. I am plaguy heavy. Perhaps I need not to have told thee that. But will only indulge a doze in my chair, for an hour; then ſhake myſelf, waſh, and refreſh. At my time of life, with my conſtitution, that's all that's wanted. 

Good night to me!—It cannot be broad day till I am awake.—Aw-w-w-w-haugh—Pox of this yawning! 

Is not thy uncle dead yet? 

What's come to mine, that he writes not to my laſt!—Hunting after morewiſdom of nations,I ſuppoſe!—Yaw—Yaw—Yawning again!—Pen, begone. 

LETTER XLI. Mr.LOVELACE,ToJOHN BELFORD,Eſq
Monday, May29.NOW have I eſtabliſhed myſelf for ever in my charmer's heart. 

The Captain came at ſeven, as promiſed, and ready equipped for his journey. My beloved choſe not to give us her company till our firſt converſation was over.—Aſhamed, I ſuppoſe [But to my ſhame, if ſhe was], to be preſent at that part of it, which was to reſtore her to her virgin ſtate, by my confeſſion, after herwifehoodhad been reported to her uncle. But ſhe took her cue nevertheleſs, and liſtened to all that paſſed. 

The modeſteſt women, Jack, muſtthink,and think deeply ſometimes.—I wonder whether they ever bluſh at thoſe things by themſelves, at which they have ſo charming a knack of bluſhing in company.—If not; and if bluſhing be a ſign of grace or modeſty, have not the ſex as great a command over their bluſhes, as they are ſaid to have over their tears? This reflection would lead me a great way into female minds, were I diſpoſed to purſue it. 

I told the Captain, that I would prevent his queſtion; and accordingly, after I had injoined the ſtricteſt ſecrecy, that no advantage might be given to James Harlowe; and which he anſwered for as well on Mr. Harlowe's part as his own; I acknowleged nakedly and fairly the whole truth.—To wit,'That we were not yet married.—I gave him hints of the cauſes of procraſtination.—Some of them owing tounhappy miſunderſtanding: But chiefly to the Lady's deſire of previous reconciliation with her friend•and to a delicacy that had no example.' 

Leſs nice ladies than this, Jack, love to have delays, wilful andſtudieddelays, imputed to them in theſe caſes—Yet are indelicate in their affected delicacy; for do they not thereby tacitly confeſs, that they expect to be the greateſt gainers in wedlock; and that there isſelf-denialin the pride they take in delaying? 

'I told him the reaſon of our paſſing to the people below as marry'd—Yet as under a vow of reſtriction▪as to conſummation, which had kept us both to the height, one ofſorbearing,the other ofvigilantpunctilio; even to the denial of thoſe innocent freedoms, which betrothed lovers never ſcruple to allow and to take. 

'I then communicated to him a copy of my propoſals of ſettlement; the ſubſtance of her written anſwer; the contents of my letter of invitation to Lord M. to be her nuptial father; and of my Lord's generous reply. But ſaid, that having apprehenſions of delay from his infirmities, and my beloved chooſing by all means (and that from principles ofunrequitedduty) a private ſolemnization, I had written to excuſe his lordſhip's preſence; and expected an anſwer every hour. 

'The ſettlements, I told him, were actually drawing by counſellor Williams, of whoſe eminence he muſt have heard [He had]; and of the truth of this he might ſatisfy himſelf before he went out of town. 

'When theſe were drawn, approved, and ingroſſed, nothing, I ſaid, but ſigning, and the nomination of my happy day, would be wanting. I had a pride, I declared, in doing the higheſt juſtice to ſo beloved a creature, of my own voluntary motion, and without the intervention of a family from whom I had received the greateſt inſults. And this being ourpreſent ſituation, I was contented, that Mr. John Harlowe ſhould ſuſpend his reconciliatory purpoſes till our marriage were actually ſolemnized.' 

The Captain was highly delighted with all I had ſaid: Yet owned, that as his dear friend Mr. Harlowe had•xpreſſed himſelf greatly pleaſed to hear that we were•ctually marry'd, he could have wiſhed ithadbeen ſo. But, nevertheleſs, he doubted not that all would be•ell. 

He ſaw my reaſons, he ſaid, and approved of them,•or making the gentlewomen below (whom again he•nderſtood to be good ſort of people) believe, that the•eremony had paſſed; which ſo well accounted for•hat the Lady's maid had told Mr. Harlowe's friend. Mr. James Harlowe, he ſaid, had certainly ends to•nſwer in keeping open the breach; andascertainly•ad formed a deſign to get his ſiſter out of my hands. Wherefore it as much imported his worthy friend to•eep this treaty a ſecret, as it did me; at leaſt till he•ad formed his party, and taken his meaſures. Ill-•ill and paſſion were dreadful miſrepreſenters. It was amazing to him, that animoſity could be carried•as high againſt a man capable of views ſo pacific and•honourable, and who had ſhewn ſuch a command of•s temper, in this whole tranſaction. Generoſity,•deed, in every caſe, where love of ſtratagem and•trigue [I would excuſe him] were not concerned,•as a part of my character— 

He was proceeding, when breakfaſt being ready,•came the empreſs of my heart, irradiating all around•er, as with a glory—A benignity and graciouſneſs in•er aſpect, that, tho' natural to it, had been long ba•iſhed from it. 

Next to proſtration lowly bowed the Captain. O•ow the ſweet creature ſmiled her approbation of him!•everence from one, begets reverence from another.•en are more of monkeys in imitation, than they•hink themſelves—Involuntarily, in a manner, I bentmy knee—My deareſt life—and made a very fine ſpeech on preſenting the captain to her. No title, myſelf, to her lip or cheek, 'tis well he attempted not either—He was indeed ready to worſhip her;—could only touch her charming hand— 

I have told the Captain, my dear creature—And then I briefly repeated, as if I had ſuppoſed ſhe had not heard it, all I had told him. 

He was aſtoniſh'd, that any-body could be diſpleaſed one moment with ſuch an angel. He undertook her cauſe as the higheſt degree of merit to himſelf. 

Never, I muſt needs ſay, did the angel ſo muchlookthe angel. All placid, ſerene, ſmiling, ſelf-aſſured: A more lovely fluſh than uſual heightening her natural graces, and adding charms, even to radiance, to her charming complexion. 

After we had ſeated ourſelves, the agreeable ſubject was renew'd, as we took our chocolate. How happy ſhould ſhe be in her uncle's reſtored favour! 

The Captain engaged for it—No more delays, he hoped, of her part! Let the happy day be butonceover, all would then be right!—But was it improper to aſk for copies of my propoſals, and of her anſwer, in order to ſhew them to his dear friend her uncle? 

As Mr. Lovelace pleaſed—O that the dear creature would always ſay ſo! 

It muſt be in ſtrict confidence then, I ſaid—But would it not be better to ſhew her uncle the draught of the ſettlements, when drawn? 

And will yoube ſo good,as to allow of this, Mr. Lovelace? 

There, Belford! We were onceThe Quarrelſome,but now we areThe Polite, Lovers.— 

Indeed, my deareſt creature, I will,if you deſire it; and if Captain Tomlinſon will engage, that Mr. Harlowe ſhall keep them abſolutely a ſecret; that I may not be ſubjected to the cavil and controul of any other of a family that have uſed me ſo very ill. 

Now indeed, Sir, you are very obliging. 

Doſt think, Jack, that my face did not now alſo•hine? 

I held out my hand (firſt conſecrating it with a kiſs) for hers. She condeſcended to give it me. I preſſed it to my lips: You know not, Captain Tomlinſon (with an air), all ſtorms overblown, what a happy man— 

Charming couple! His hands lifted up—How will my good friend rejoice!—O that he were preſent!—You know not, Madam, how dear you ſtill are to your uncle Harlowe!— 

I am unhappy ever to have diſobliged him! 

Not too much of that, however, faireſt, thought I! 

He repeated his reſolutions of ſervice, and that in ſo acceptable a manner, that the dear creature wiſhed, that neither he, nor any of his, might ever want a friend of equal benevolence. 

None of his,ſhe ſaid; for the captain brought it in, that he had five children living, by one of the beſt of wives and mothers, whoſe excellent management made him as happy, as if his eight hundred pounds a year (which was all he had to boaſt of) were two thouſand. 

Withoutoeconomy, the oraculous lady ſaid, no eſtate was large enough.Withit, the leaſt was not too ſmall. 

Lie ſtill, teazing villain! lie ſtill!—I was only ſpeaking to my conſcience, Jack. 

And let me aſk you, Mr. Lovelace, ſaid the Captain; yet not ſo much from doubt, as that I may proceed upon ſure grounds—You arewillingto co-operate with my dear friend in a general reconciliation? 

Let me tell you, Mr. Tomlinſon, that if it can be diſtinguiſhed, that my readineſs to make up with a family, of whoſe generoſity I have not had reaſon to think highly, is intirely owing to the value I have for this angel of a woman, I will not only co-operate with Mr. John Harlowe, as you aſk; but I will meetMr. James Harlowe ſenior, and his lady, all the way▪And furthermore, to make the ſon James and Arabella quite eaſy, I will abſolutely diſclaim any furthe•intereſt, whether living or dying, in any of the thre•brothers eſtates; contenting myſelf with what my beloved's grandfather has bequeathed to her: For I hav•reaſon to be abundantly ſatisfied with my own circumſtances and proſpects—Enough rewarded, wer•ſhe not to bring a ſhilling in dowry, in a lady who ha•a merit ſuperior to all the goods of fortune. True a•the Goſpel, Belford! Why had not this ſcene a rea•foundation? 

The dear creature, by her eyes, expreſſed her gratitude, before her lips could utter it. O Mr. Lovelace, ſaid ſhe—You have infinitely—And there ſh•ſtopt— 

The Captain run over in my praiſe. He was reall•affected. 

O that I had not ſuch a mixture of revenge an•pride in my love, thought I!—But [my old plea•cannot I make her amends at any time?—And is no•her virtue now in the heighth of its probation?—Would ſhe lay aſide, like the friends of my uncontending Roſebud, all thought of defiance—Woul•ſhe throw herſelf upon my mercy, and try me but on•fortnight in the Life of Honour—What then?—cannot ſay, What then. 

Do not deſpiſe me, Jack, for my inconſiſtency—In no two letters perhaps agreeing with myſelf—Who expects conſiſtency in men of our character?—But I am mad with love—Fired by revenge—Puzzle with my own devices—My inventions are my curſe—My pride my puniſhment—Drawn five or ſix wa•at once—Canſhepoſſibly be ſo unhappy asI?•why, why was this woman ſo divinely excellent!—Yet how know I that ſhe is?—What have been h•tryals? Have I had the courage to make a ſingle o•upon herperſon,tho' fifty upon hertemper?—Enough, I hope, to make her afraid of ever diſobligeing me more!— 

I MUST baniſh reflection, or I am a loſt man. For•heſe two hours paſt have I hated myſelf for my own contrivances. And this not only from what Ihaverelated to thee; but from what I havefurtherto re•ate. But I have now once more ſteeled my heart. My vengeance is uppermoſt; for I have been re-peruſing ſome of Miſs Howe's virulence. The contempt they have both held me in, I cannot bear.— 

The happieſt breakfaſt-time, my beloved owned, that ſhe had ever known ſince ſhe had left her father's houſe.She might have let this alone.The Captain renewed all his proteſtations of ſervice. He would write me word how his dear friend received the account he ſhould give him of the happy ſituation of our affairs, and what he thought of the ſettlements, as ſoon as I ſhould ſend him the kindly-promiſed draughts. And we parted with great profeſſions of mutual eſteem; my beloved putting up vows for the ſucceſs of his generous mediation. 

When I returned from attending the Captain down ſtairs, which I did to the outward door, my beloved met me as I entered the dining-room; complacency reigning in every lovely feature. 

You ſee me already, ſaid ſhe, another creature. You know not, Mr. Lovelace, how near my heart this hoped-for reconciliation is. I am now willing to baniſh every diſagreeable remembrance. You know not, Sir, how much you have obliged me. And Oh, Mr. Lovelace, how happy ſhall I be, when my heart•s lightened from the all-ſinking weight of a father's curſe! When my dear mamma (You don't know, Sir, half the excellencies of my dear mamma! and what a kind heart ſhe has, when it is left to follow its own impulſes—When this bleſſed mamma) ſhall once more fold me to her indulgent boſom! When I ſhallagain have uncles and aunts, and a brother and ſiſter, all ſtriving who ſhall ſhew moſt kindneſs and favour to the poor outcaſt, thenno morean outcaſt!—And you, Mr. Lovelace, to behold all this, and to be received into a family ſo dear to me, with welcome—What tho' a little cold at firſt? when they come to know you better, and to ſee you oftener, no freſh cauſes of diſguſt occurring, and you, as I hope, having enter'd upon a new courſe, all will be warmer and warmer love on both ſides, till every one perhaps will wonder, how they came to ſet themſelves againſt you. 

Then drying her eyes with her handkerchief, after a few moments pauſing, on a ſudden, as if recollecting that ſhe had been led by her joy to an expreſſion of it, which ſhe had not intended I ſhould ſee, ſhe retired to her chamber with precipitation—Leaving me almoſt as unable to ſtand it, as herſelf. 

In ſhort, I was—I want words to ſay how I was—My noſe had been made to tingle before; my eyes have before been made to gliſten by this ſoul-moving beauty; but ſoverymuch affected, I never was—for, trying to check my ſenſibility, it was too ſtrong for me, and I even ſobbed—Yes, by my ſoul, Iaudiblyſobbed, and was forced to turn from her before ſhe had well finiſhed her affecting ſpeech. 

I want, methinks, now I have owned the odd ſenſation, to deſcribe it to thee—The thing was ſo ſtrange to me—Something choaking, as it were, in my throat—I know not how—Yet, I muſt needs ſay, tho' I am out of countenance upon the recollection, that there was ſomething very pretty in it; and I wiſh I could know it again, that I might have a more perfect idea of it, and be better able to deſcribe it to thee. 

But this effect of her joy on ſuch an occaſion gives me a high notion of what that virtue muſt be [What other name can I call it?] which in a mind ſo capabl•of delicate tranſport, ſhould be able to make ſo charminga creature in her very bloom, all froſt and ſnow to every advance of Love from the man ſhe hates not. This muſt be all from Education too:—Muſt it not, Belford? CanEducationhave ſtronger force in a woman's heart thanNature?—Sure it cannot. But if it can, how intirely right are parents to cultivate their daughters minds, and to inſpire them with notions of reſerve and diſtance to our ſex; and indeed to make them think highly of their own? For pride is an excellent ſubſtitute, let me tell thee, where virtue ſhines not out, as the ſun, in its own unborrowed luſtre. 

LETTER XLII. Mr.LOVELACE,ToJOHN BELFORD,Eſq
AND now it is time to confeſs (and yet I know, that thy conjectures are aforehand with my expoſition), that this Captain Tomlinſon, who is ſo great a favourite with my charmer, and who takes ſo much delight in healing breaches, and reconciling differences, is neither a greater man nor a leſs, than honeſt Patrick McDonald, attended by a diſcarded footman of his own finding out. 

Thou knoweſt what a various-lifed raſcal he is; and to what better hopes born and educated. But that ingenious knack of Forgery, for which he was expelled the Dublin-Univerſity, and a detection ſince in Evidenceſhip, have been his ruin. For theſe have thrown him from one country to another; and at laſt, into the way of life, which would make him a fit huſband for Miſs Howe's Townſend with her contrabands. He is, thou knoweſt, admirably qualified for any enterprize that requires adroitneſs and ſolemnity. And can there, after all, be a higher piece of juſtice aimed at, than to keep one Smuggler in readineſs to play againſt another? 

'Well but, Lovelace (methinks thou queſtioneſt), how cameſt thou to venture upon ſuch a contriveanceas this, when, as thou haſt told me, the Lady uſed to be a month at a time at this uncle's; and muſt therefore, in all probability, know, that there was not a Captain Tomlinſon in all his neighbourhood; at leaſt no one of the name ſo intimate with him, as this man pretends to be?'— 

This objection, Jack, is ſo natural a one, that I could not help obſerving to my charmer, that ſhe muſt ſurely have heard her uncle ſpeak of this gentleman. No, ſhe ſaid, ſhe never had. Beſides, ſhe had not been at her uncle Harlowe's for near ten months [This I had heard her ſay before]: And there were ſeveral gentlemen who uſed the ſame Green, whom ſhe knew not. 

We are all very ready, thou knoweſt, to believe what we like. 

And what was the reaſon, thinkeſt thou, that ſhe had not been of ſo long time at this uncle's?—Why, this old ſinner, who imagines himſelf intitled to call me to account for my freedoms with the Sex, has lately fallen into familiarities, as it is ſuſpected, with his houſekeeper, who aſſumes airs upon it.—A curſed deluding Sex!—In youth, middle age, or dotage, they take us all in. 

Doſt thou not ſee, however, that this houſekeeper knows nothing, nor is to know any thing, of the treaty of reconciliation deſigned to be ſet on foot; and therefore the Uncle always comes to the Captain, the Captain goes not to the Uncle: And this I ſurmiſed to the Lady. And then it was a natural ſuggeſtion, that the Captain was the rather applied to, as he is a ſtranger to the reſt of the family: Need I tell thee the meaning of all this? 

But this intrigue of theAntientis a piece of private hiſtory, the truth of which my beloved cares not to own, and indeed affects to diſbelieve. As ſhe does alſo ſome puiſny gallantries of her fooliſh brother; which, by way of recrimination, I have hinted at, without naming my informant in their family. 

Well but, methinks, thou queſtioneſt again, Is it not probable that Miſs Howe will make inquiry after ſuch a man as Tomlinſon?—And when ſhe cannot— 

I know what thou wouldſt ſay—But I have no doubt, that Wilſon will be ſo good, if I deſire it, as to give into my own hands any letter that may be brought by Collins to his houſe, for a week to come. And now I hope thou'rt ſatisfied. 

I will conclude with a ſhort ſtory. 

'Two neighbouring ſovereigns were at war together, about ſome pitiful chuck-farthing thing or other; no matter what; for the leaſt trifles will ſet princes and children at loggerheads. Their armies had been drawn up in battalia ſome days, and the news of a deciſive action expected every hour to arrive at each court. At laſt, iſſue was joined; a bloody battle was fought; and a fellow, who had been a ſpectator of it, arriving with the news of a complete victory, at the capital of one of the princes, ſome time before the appointed couriers, the bells were ſet a ringing, bonfires and illuminations were made, and the people went to bed intoxicated with joy and good liquor. But the next day all was reverſed: The victorious enemy, purſuing his advantage, was expected every hour at the gates of the almoſt defenceleſs capital. The firſt reporter was hereupon ſought for, and found; and being queſtioned, pleaded a great deal of merit, in that he had, in ſo diſmal a ſituation, taken ſuch a ſpace of time from the diſtreſs of his fellow-citizens, and given it to feſtivity, as were the hours between the falſe good news and the real bad.' 

Do thou, Belford, make the application. This I know, that I have given greater joy to my Beloved, than ſhe had thought would ſo ſoon fall to her ſhare. And as the human life is properly ſaid to be chequerwork, no doubt but a perſon of her prudence will make the beſt of it, and ſet off ſo much good againſtſo much bad, in order to ſtrike as juſt a balance as poſſible. 

THE Lady, in three ſeveral letters, acquaints her friend with the moſt material paſſages and converſations contained in thoſe of Mr. Lovelace's preceding. Theſe are her words, on relating what the commiſſion of the pretended Tomlinſon was, after the apprehenſions that his diſtant inquiry had given her. 

'At laſt, my dear, all theſe doubts and fears were cleared up, and baniſhed; and, in their place, a delightful proſpect was opened to me. For it comes happily out (but at preſent it muſt be an abſolute ſecret, for reaſons which I ſhall mention in the ſequel), 'that the gentleman was ſent by my uncle Harlowe [I thought he could not be angry with me for ever]; all owing to the converſation that paſſed between your good Mr. Hickman and him. For although Mr. Hickman's application was too harſhly rejected at the time, my uncle could not but think better of it afterwards, and of the arguments that worthy gentleman uſed in my favour. 

'Who, upon a paſſionate repulſe, would deſpair of having a reaſonable requeſt granted?—Who would not, by gentleneſs and condeſcenſion, endeavour to leave favourable impreſſions upon an angry mind; which, when it comes coolly to reflect, may induce it to work itſelf into a condeſcending temper? To requeſt a favour, as I have often ſaid, is one thing; to challenge it as our due, is another. And what right has a petitioner to be angry at arepulſe,if he has not a right todemandwhat he ſues for as adebt?' 

She deſcribes Captain Tomlinſon, on his breakfaſt viſit, to be'a grave good ſort of man.'And in another place,'A genteel man, of great gravity, and a good aſpect; ſhe believes upwards of fifty years of age I liked him, ſays ſhe, as ſoon as I ſaw him.' 

As her proſpects are now more favourable than heretofore, ſhe wiſhes, that her hopes of Mr. Lovelace's ſo often promiſed reformation were better grounded, than ſhe is afraid they can be. 

'We have both been extremely puzzled, my dear, ſays ſhe, to reconcile ſome parts of Mr. Lovelace's character with other parts of it: His good with his bad; ſuch of the former in particular, as, His generoſity to his tenants; His bounty to the innkeeper's daughter; His readineſs to put me upon doing kind things by my good Norton, and others. 

'A ſtrange mixture in his mind, as I have told him! For he is certainly (as I have reaſon to ſay, looking back upon his paſt behaviour to me in twenty inſtances) a hard-hearted man.—Indeed, my dear, I have thought more than once, that he had rather ſee me in tears, than give me reaſon to be pleaſed with him. 

'My couſin Morden ſays, that free livers are remorſeleſsVol.III.p.361.See alſo Mr. Lovelace's own confeſſion of the delight he takes in a lady's tears, in different parts of his letters; particularly in p.66.of this Volume.. And ſo they muſt be in the very nature of things. 

'Mr. Lovelace is a proud man. That we have long obſerved. And I am truly afraid, that his very generoſity is more owing to hisprideand hisvanity,than to thatphilanthropy,which diſtinguiſhes a beneficent mind. 

'Money he values not, but as a means to ſupport his pride and his independence. And it is eaſy, as I have often thought, for a perſon to part with aſecondaryappetite, when, by ſo doing, he can promote or gratify afirſt. 

'I am afraid, my dear, that there muſt have been ſome fault in his Education. His natural byas was not, I fancy, ſufficiently attended to. He was inſtructed, perhaps (as his power was likely to belarge), to do good and beneficent actions; but not fromproper motives,I doubt. 

'If hehad,his generoſity would not have ſtopt atpride,but would have ſtruck intohumanity; and then would he not have contented himſelf with doing praiſeworthy things by fits and ſtarts, or, as if relying on the doctrine of merits, he hoped by a good action to atone for a bad oneThat the Lady judges rightly of him in this place, ſee Vol. I. p. 233. where, giving the motive for his generoſity to his Roſebud, he ſays—'As I make it my rule, whenever I have committed a very capital enormity, to do ſome good by way of atonement; and as I believe I am a pretty deal indebted on that ſcore; I intend to join an hundred pounds to Johnny's aunt's hundred pounds, to make one innocent couple happy.'—Beſides which motive, he had a further view to anſwer in that inſtance of his generoſity; as may be ſeen Vol. II. Letters xxiii, xxiv, xxv, xxvi. 

To ſhew the conſiſtence of his actions, as theynowappear, with his views and principles, as he lays them down in hisfirſt letters,it may not be amiſs to refer the reader to his letters, Vol. I. Numb. xxxiv. p. 232. and Numb. xxxv. p. 233, to 236. 

See alſo Vol. I. p. 190, 191, 192, and 270, 271, 272, for Clariſſa's early opinion of Mr. Lovelace.—Whence the coldneſs and indifference to him; which he ſo repeatedly accuſes her of, will be accounted for, more to her glory, than to his honour. 

; but he would have been uniformly noble, and done the good for itsownſake. 

'O my dear! what a lot have I drawn!Pridehisvirtue; andRevengehis other predominating quality!—This one conſolation, however, remains: He is not an infidel, an unbeliever: Had he been aninfidel,there would have been no room at all for hope of him; but (priding himſelf, as he does, in his fertile invention) he would have been utterly abandoned, irreclaimable, and a ſavage.' 

When ſhe comes to relate thoſe occaſions, which Mr. Lovelace in his narrative, acknowleges himſelf to be affected by, ſhe thus expreſſes herſelf: 

'He endeavoured, as once before, to conceal his emotion. But why, my dear, ſhould theſe men (for Mr. Lovelace is not ſingular in this) think themſelves above giving theſe beautiful proofs of a feelingheart? Were it in my power again to chooſe, or refuſe, I would reject the man with contempt, who ſought to ſuppreſs, or offered to deny, the power of being affected uponproperoccaſions, as either a ſavage-hearted creature, or as one who was ſo ignorant of the principal glory of the human nature, as to place his pride in a barbarous inſenſibility. 

'Theſe lines tranſlated from Juvenal by Mr. Tate, 'I have been often pleaſed with:Compaſſionpropertomankindappears,Which nature witneſs'd, when ſhe lent us tears.Of tender ſentimentsWEonly giveTheſe proofs: To weep isOURprerogative;To ſhew by pitying looks, and melting eyes,How with a ſuff'ring friend we ſympathize.Who can all ſenſe of others ills eſcape,Is but a brute at beſt, in human ſhape.THIS natural pietydid firſt refineOur wit, and rais'd our thoughts to things divine:THISproves our ſpirit of the gods deſcent,While that of beaſts is prone and downward bent.Tothem,but earth-born life they did diſpenſe;Tous,formutual aid,celeſtial ſenſe. 

SHE takes notice, to the advantage of the people of the houſe, that ſuch a good man, as Captain Tomlinſon, had ſpoken well of them, upon inquiry. 

LETTER XLIII. Mr.LOVELACE,ToJOHN BELFORD,Eſq
Tueſday, May30.I Have a letter from Lord M. Such a one as I would wiſh for, if I intended matrimony. But as matters are circumſtanced, I cannot think of ſhewing it to my Beloved. 

My Lord regrets,'that he is not to be the Lady's nuptial father. He ſeems apprehenſive that I haveſtill, ſpecious as my reaſons are, ſome miſchief in my head.' 

He graciouſly conſents,'that I may marry when I pleaſe; and offers one or both of my couſins to aſſiſt my bride, and to ſupport her ſpirits on the occaſion; ſince, as he underſtands, ſhe is ſo much afraid to venture with me.' 

'Pritchard, he tells me, has his final orders to draw up deeds, to aſſign over to me in perpetuity 1000l. per annum; which he will execute the ſame hour that the Lady in perſon owns her marriage.' 

He conſents,'that the jointure be made from my own eſtate.' 

He wiſhes,'that the Lady would have accepted of his draught; and commends me for tendering it to her. But reproaches me for pride in not keeping it myſelf.What the right-ſide gives up, the left,he ſays,may be the better for.' 

The girls, he means. 

With all my heart. If I can have Miſs Clariſſa Harlowe, the devil take every thing elſe. 

A good deal of other ſtuff writes this ſtupid Peer; ſcribbling in ſeveral places half a dozen lines, apparently for no other reaſon, but to bring in as many muſty words in an old ſaw. 

If thou aſkeſt, How I can manage, ſince my Beloved will wonder, that I have not an anſwer from my Lord to ſuch a letter as I wrote to him; and if I own I have one, will expect that I ſhould ſhew it to her, as I did my letter?—This I anſwer—That I can: be informed by Pritchard, that my Lord has the gout in his right-hand; and has ordered him to attend me in form, for my particular orders about the tranſfer: And I can ſee Pritchard, thou knoweſt, at the King's Arms, or where I pleaſe in town; and he, by word of mouth, can acquaint me with everything in my Lord's letter that is neceſſary for her to know. 

Whenever it ſuits me, I can reſtore the old Peer tohis right hand, and then can make him write a much more ſenſible letter than this he has how ſent me. 

Thou knoweſt, that an adroitneſs in the art ofmanual imitation,was one of my earlieſt attainments. It has been ſaid, on this occaſion, that had I been abadman inmeumandtuummatters, I ſhould not have been fit to live. As to the girls, we hold it no ſin to cheat them. And are we not told, that in beingwelldeceived conſiſts the whole of human happineſs? 

Wedneſday, May31.ALL ſtill happier and happier. A very high honour done me: A chariot, inſtead of a coach, permitted, purpoſely to indulge me in the ſubject of ſubjects. 

Our diſcourſe in this ſweet airing turned upon our future manner of life. The day is baſhfully promiſed me.Soon,was the anſwer to my repeated urgency. Our equipage, our ſervants, our liveries, were parts of the delightful ſubject. A deſire that the wretch who had given me intelligence out of the family [honeſt Joſeph Leman] might not be one of our menials; and her reſolution to have her faithful Hannah, whether recovered or not; were ſignified; and both as readily aſſented to. 

The reconciliation proſpect was enlarged upon. If her uncle Harlowe will but pave the way to it, and if it can be brought about, ſhe ſhall be happy.—Happy, with a ſigh,as it is Now poſſible ſhe can be!—She won't forbear, Jack! 

I told her, that I had heard from Pritchard, juſt before we ſet out, and expected him in town to-morrow from Lord M. to take my directions. I ſpoke with gratitude of my Lord's kindneſs to me; and with pleaſure of my aunt's and couſin's veneration for her: As alſo of his Lordſhip's concern that his gout hinder'd him from writing a reply with his own hand to my laſt. 

She pitied my Lord. She pitied poor Mrs. Fretclivilletoo; for ſhe had the goodneſs to inquire after her. The dear creature pitied every-body that ſeemed to want pity. Happy in her own proſpects, ſhe has leiſure to look abroad, and wiſhes every-body equally happy. 

It is likely to go very hard with Mrs. Fretchville. Her face, which ſhe had valued herſelf upon, will be utterly ruin'd. This good, however, ſhe may reap from ſo great an evil:—As the greater malady generally ſwallows up the leſs, ſhe may have a grief on this occaſion, that may diminiſh the other grief, and make it tolerable. 

I had a gentle reprimand for this light turn on ſo heavy an evil.—For what was the loſs of beauty to the loſs of a good huſband?—Excellent creature! 

Her hopes, and her pleaſure upon thoſe hopes, that Miſs Howe's mother would be reconciled to her, were alſo mentioned.GoodMrs. Howe was her word, for a woman ſo covetous, and ſo remorſeleſs in her covetouſneſs, that no one elſe would call hergood.But this dear creature has ſuch an extenſion in her love, as to be capable of valuing the moſt inſignificant animal related to thoſe whom ſhe reſpects.Love me, and love my dog,I have heard Lord M. ſay.—Who knows, but that I may in time, in compliment to myſelf, bring her to think well of thee, Jack? 

But what am I about?—Am I not all this time arraigning my own heart?—I know I am, by the remorſe I feel in it, while my pen bears teſtimony to her excellence. But yet I muſt add (for no ſelfiſh conſideration ſhall hinder me from doing juſtice to this admirable creature), that in this converſation ſhe demonſtrated ſo much prudent knowlege in every thing that relates to that part of the domeſtic management, which falls under the care of a miſtreſs of a family, that I believe ſhe has no equal of her years in the world. 

I break off, to re-peruſe ſome of Miſs Howe's virulence. 

Curſed letters, theſe of Miſs Howe, Jack!—Do thou turn back to thoſe of mine, where I take notice of them.—I proceed— 

Upon the whole, my charmer was all gentleneſs, all eaſe, all ſerenity, throughout this ſweet excurſion. Nor had ſhe reaſon to be otherwiſe: For it being the firſt time that I had the honour of her companyſola,I was reſolved to encourage her, by my reſpectfulneſs, to repeat the favour. 

On our return, I found the counſellor's clerk waiting for me, with a draught of the marriage-ſettlements. 

They are drawn, with only the neceſſary variations, from thoſe made for my mother. The original of which (now returned by the counſellor), as well as the new draughts, I have put into my Beloved's hands. 

This made the lawyer's work eaſy; nor can ſhe have a better precedent; the great Lord S. having ſettled them, at the requeſt of my mother's relations; all the difference, my charmer's are 100l. per annummore than my mother's. 

I offer'd to read to her the old deed, while ſhe looked over the draught; for ſhe had refuſed her preſence at the examination with the clerk: But this ſhe alſo declined. 

I ſuppoſe ſhe did not care to hear of ſo many children, firſt, ſecond, third, fourth, fifth, ſixth, and ſeventh ſons, and as many daughters,to be begotten upon the body of the ſaid Clariſſa Harlowe. 

Charming matrimonial recitativoes!—tho' it is always ſaidlawfully begottentoo—As if a man could beget childrenunlawfullyupon the body of his own wife.—But thinkeſt thou not that theſe arch rogues the lawyers hereby intimate, that a man may have children by his wifebeforemarriage?—This muſt be what they mean. Why will theſe ſly fellows put an honeſt man in mind of ſuch rogueries?—But hence,as in numberleſs other inſtances, we ſee, thatLawandGoſpelare two very different things. 

Dorcas, in our abſence, tried to get at the wainſcot box in the dark cloſet. But it cannot be done without violence. And to run a riſque of conſequence now, for mere curioſity-ſake, would be inexcuſable. 

Mrs. Sinclair and the nymphs are all of opinion, that I am now ſo much of a favourite, and have ſuch a viſible ſhare in her confidence, and even in her affections, that I may do what I will, and plead violence ofpaſſion; which, they will have it, makes violence ofactionpardonable with their ſex; as well as an allowed extenuation with the unconcerned of both ſexes; and they all offer their helping hands. Why not? they ſay: Has ſhe not paſſed for my wife before them all?—And is ſhe not in a fine way of being reconciled to her friends; which was the pretence for poſtponing conſummation? 

They again urge me, ſince it is ſo difficult to makenightmy friend, to an attempt in theday.They remind me, that the ſituation of their houſe is ſuch, that no noiſes can be heard out of it; and ridicule me for making it neceſſary for a lady to be undreſſed. It was not always ſo with me, poor old man! Sally told me; ſaucily flinging her handkerchief in my face. 

LETTER XLIV. Mr.LOVELACE,ToJOHN BELFORD,Eſq
Friday, June2.NOtwithſtanding my ſtudied for politeneſs and complaiſance for ſome days paſt; and though I have wanted courage to throw the maſk quite aſide; yet I have made the dear creature more than once look about her, by the warm, tho' decent expreſſions of my paſſion. I have brought her to own, that I ammorethan indifferent to her: But as to LOVE, which I preſſed her to acknowlege,What need of acknowlegements of that ſort, when a woman conſents to marry?—And once repulſing me with diſpleaſure,The proof of the true love I was vowing for her, wasreſpect,notfreedom. And offering to defend myſelf, ſhe told me, that all the conception ſhe had been able to form of a faulty paſſion, was, that it muſt demonſtrate itſelf as mine ſought to do. 

I endeavoured to juſtify my paſſion, by laying over-delicacy at her door. That wasnot,ſhe ſaid,myfault, if it werehers.She muſt plainly tell me, that I appeared to her incapable of diſtinguiſhing what were the requiſites of a pure mind. Perhaps, had thelibertinepreſumption to imagine, that there was no difference inheart,nor any but what proceeded fromeducationandcuſtom,between the pure and the impure—And yet cuſtomalone,as ſhe obſerved, would make a ſecond nature, as well in good as in bad habits. 

I HAVE juſt now been called to account for ſome innocent liberties which I thought myſelf intitled to take before the women; as they ſuppoſe us married, and now within view of conſummation. 

I took the lecture very hardly; and with impatience wiſh'd for the happy day and hour, when I might call her all my own, and meet with no check from a niceneſs that had no example. 

She looked at me with a baſhful kind of contempt. I thought itcontempt,and required the reaſon for it; not being conſcious of offence, as I told her. 

This is not the firſt time, Mr. Lovelace, ſaid ſhe, that I have had cauſe to be diſpleaſed with you, whenyou,perhaps, have not thought yourſelf exceptionable.—But, Sir, let me tell you, that the married ſtate, in my eye, is a ſtate of purity, and (I think ſhe told me) not oflicentiouſneſs; ſo at leaſt, I underſtood her. 

Marriage-purity,Jack!—Very comical, 'faith—Yet, ſweet dears, half the female world ready to run away with a rake,becauſehe is a rake; and for nootherreaſon; nay, every other reaſonagainſttheir choice. 

But have not you and I, Belford, ſeen young wives, who would be thought modeſt; and when maids, were fantaſtically ſhy; permit freedoms in public from theirlambenthuſbands, which have ſhewn, that they have forgot what belongs either to prudence or decency? While every modeſt eye has ſunk under the ſhameleſs effrontery, and every modeſt face been covered with bluſhes for thoſe who could not bluſh. 

I once, upon ſuch an occaſion, propoſed to a circle of a dozen, thus ſcandalized, to withdraw; ſince they muſt needs ſee that as well thelady,as the gentleman, wanted to be in private. This motion had its effect upon the amorous pair; and I was applauded for the check given to their licentiouſneſs. 

But, upon another occaſion of this ſort, I acted a little more in character.—For I ventured to make an attempt upon a bride, which I ſhould not have had the courage to make, had not the unbluſhing paſſiveneſs with which ſhe received her fond huſband's public toyings (looking round her with triumph rather than with ſhame, upon every lady preſent), incited my curioſity to know if the ſame complacency might not be ſhewn to a private friend. 'Tis true, I was in honour obliged to keep the ſecret. But I never ſaw the turtles bill afterwards, but I thought of Number Two to the ſame female; and in my heart thanked the fond huſband for the leſſon he had taught his wife. 

From what I have ſaid, thou wilt ſee, that I approve of my beloved's exception topublicloves. That, I hope, is all the charming Iſicle means bymarriage-purity. 

From the whole of the above, thou wilt gather, that I have not been a mere dangler, a Hickman, inthe paſſed days, though not abſolutely active, and a Lovelace. 

The dear creature now conſiders herſelf as my wife-elect. Theunſadden'dheart, no longer prudiſh, will not now, I hope, give the fable turn to every action of the man ſhe diſlikes not. And yet ſhe muſt keep up ſo much reſerve, as will juſtify paſt inflexibilities. Many and many a pretty ſoul would yield, were ſhe not afraid that the man ſhe favoured would think the worſe of her for it. This is alſo a part of the Rake's Creed. But ſhould ſhe reſent ever ſo ſtrongly, ſhe cannot now break with me; ſince, if ſhe does, there will be an end of the family reconciliation; and that in a way highly diſcreditable to herſelf. 

Sat. June3.JUST returned from Doctors-Commons. I have been endeavouring to get a licence. Very true, Jack. I have the mortification to find a difficulty in obtaining this all-fettering inſtrument, as the Lady is of rank and fortune, and as there is no conſent of father ornext friend. 

I made report of this difficulty. It is very right, ſhe ſays, that ſuch difficulties ſhould be made. But not to a man of my known fortune, ſurely, Jack, tho' the woman were the daughter of a duke. 

I aſked, If ſhe approved of the ſettlements? She ſaid, She had compared them with my mother's, and had no objection. She had written to Miſs Howe upon the ſubject, ſhe owned; and to inform her of our preſent ſituationAs this Letter of the Lady contains no new matter, but what may be collected from thoſe of Mr. Lovelace, it is omitted.. 

JUST now, in high good humour, my beloved returned me the draughts of the ſettlements; a copy of which I had ſent to Captain Tomlinſon. She complimented me, that ſhe never had any doubt of myhonour in caſes of this nature.—In matters between man and man nobody ever had, thou knoweſt. I had need, thou'lt ſay, to have ſome good qualities. 

Great faults and great virtues are often found in the ſame perſon. In nothingverybad, but as to women: And did not one of them begin with meSee Vol.I.Letterxxxi.p.195.? 

We have held, that women have no ſouls: I am a very Jew in this point, and willing to believe they have not. And if ſo, to whom ſhall I be accountable for what I do to them? Nay, if ſouls they have, as there is no ſex in Ethereals, nor need of any, what plea can a lady hold of injuries done her in her lady-ſtate,when there is an end of her lady-ſhip? 

LETTER XLV. Mr.LOVELACE,ToJOHN BELFORD,Eſq
Monday, June5.I Am now almoſt in deſpair of ſucceeding with this charming froſt-piece by love or gentleneſs.—A copy of the draughts, as I told thee, has been ſent to Captain Tomlinſon; and that by a ſpecial meſſenger. Ingroſſments are proceeding with. I have been again at the Commons. Should in all probability have procured a licence by Malory's means, had not Malory's friend the proctor been ſuddenly ſent for to Cheſhunt, to make an old lady's will. Pritchard has told me by word of mouth,though my charmer ſaw him not,all that was neceſſary for her to know in the letter my Lord wrote, which I could not ſhew her; and taken my directions about the eſtates to be made over to me on my nuptials.—Yet with all theſe favourable appearances no conceding moment to be ſound, no improveable tenderneſs to be raiſed. 

Twice indeed with rapture, which once ſhe called rude, did I ſalute her; and each time, reſenting the freedom, did ſhe retire; tho', to do her juſtice, ſhefavoured me again with her preſence at my firſt intreaty, and took no notice of the cauſe of her withdrawing. 

Is it policy to ſhew ſo open a reſentment for innocent liberties, which, in her ſituation, ſhe muſt ſo ſoon forgive? 

Yet the woman who reſents not initiatory freedoms muſt be loſt.For Love is an incroacher. Love never goes backward. Love is always aſpiring. Always muſt aſpire. Nothing but the higheſt act of Love can ſatisfy an indulged Love. And what advantages has a lover, who values not breaking the peace, over his miſtreſs, who is ſolicitous to keep it! 

I have now at this inſtant wrought myſelf up, for the dozenth time, to a half-reſolution. A thouſand agreeable things I have to ſay to her. She is in the dining-room. Juſt gone up. She always expects me when there. 

HIGH diſpleaſure!—followed by an abrupt departure. 

I ſat down by her. I took both her hands in mine. I wouldhaveit ſo. All gentle my voice.—Her father mentioned with reſpect. Her mother with reverence. Even her brother amicably ſpoken of. I never thought I could have wiſhed ſo ardently, as I told her I did wiſh, for a reconciliation with her family. 

A ſweet and grateful fluſh then overſpread her fair face; a gentle ſigh now-and-then heaved her handkerchief. 

I perfectly long'd to hear from Captain Tomlinſon. It was impoſſible for her uncle to find fault with the draught of the ſettlements: I would not, however, be underſtood, by ſending them down, that I intended to put it in her uncle's power to delay my happy day. When, when, was it to be? 

I would haſten again to the Commons; and would not return without the licence. 

The Lawn I propoſed to retire to, as ſoon as the happy ceremony was over. This day and that day I propoſed. 

It was time enough to name the day, when the ſettlements were completed, and the licence obtained. Happy ſhould ſhe be, could the kind Captain Tomlinſon obtain her uncle's preſence privately! 

A good hint!—It may perhaps be improved upon—Either for adelay,or apacifier. 

No new delays, for heaven's ſake, I beſought her; reproaching her gently for the paſt. Name but the day—(an early day, I hoped in the following week)—that I might hail its approach, and number the tardy hours. 

My cheek reclined on her ſhoulder—kiſſing her hands by turns. Rather baſhfully than angrily reluctant, her hands ſought to be withdrawn; her ſhoulder avoiding my reclined cheek—Apparently loth and more loth to quarrel with me; her downcaſt eye confeſſing more than her lips could utter.—Now ſurely, thought I, it is my time to try if ſhe can forgive a ſtill bolder freedom than I had ever yet taken. 

I then gave her ſtruggling hands liberty. I put one arm round her waiſt: I imprinted a kiſs on her ſweet lips, with aBe quietonly, and an averted face, as if ſhe feared another. 

Encouraged by ſo gentle a repulſe, the tendereſt things I ſaid; and then, with my other hand, drew aſide the handkerchief that concealed the beauty of beauties, and preſſed with my burning lips the charmingeſt breaſt that ever my raviſhed eyes beheld. 

A very contrary paſſion to that which gave her boſom ſo delightful a ſwell, immediately took place. She ſtruggled out of my incircling arms with indignation. I detained her reluctant hand. Let me go, ſaid ſhe. I ſee there is no keeping terms with you. Baſe incroacher! Is this the deſign of your flattering ſpeeches?—Far as matters have gone, I willfor ever renounce you. You have an odious heart. Let me go, I tell you.— 

I was forced to obey, and ſhe flung from me, repeatingbaſe,and addingflattering,incroacher. 

IN vain have I urged by Dorcas for the promiſed favour of dining with her. She would not dineat all.Shecould not. 

But why makes ſhe every inch of her perſon thus ſacred?—So near the time too, that ſhe muſt ſuppoſe, that all will be my own, by deed of purchaſe and ſettlement? 

She has read, no doubt, of the art of the Eaſtern monarchs, who ſequeſter themſelves from the eyes of their ſubjects, in order to excite their adoration, when, upon ſome ſolemn occaſions, they think fit to appear in public. 

But let me aſk thee, Belford, whether (on theſe ſolemn occaſions) the preceding cavalcade; here a great officer, and there a great miniſter, with their ſatellites, and glaring equipages; do not prepare the eyes of the wondering beholders, by degrees, to bear the blaze of canopy'd majeſty (what tho' but an ugly old man perhaps himſelf? yet) glittering in the collected riches of his vaſt empire? 

And ſhould not my beloved, for her own ſake, deſcend, bydegrees,fromgoddeſs-hoodintohumanity?If it bepridethat reſtrains her, ought not that pride to be puniſhed? If, as in the Eaſtern emperors, it beartas well aspride, artis what ſhe of all women need not uſe. Ifſhame,what a ſhame to be aſhamed to communicate to her adorer's ſight the moſt admirable of her perſonal graces? 

Let me periſh, Belford, if I would not forego the brighteſt diadem in the world, for the pleaſure of ſeeing a Twin-Lovelace at each charming breaſt, drawing from it his firſt ſuſtenance; the pious taſk continued for one month, and no more! 

I now, methinks, behold this moſt charming of women in this ſweet office, preſſing with her fine fingers the generous flood into the purple mouths of each eager hunter by turns: Her conſcious eye now dropt on one, now on the other, with a ſigh of maternal tenderneſs; and then raiſed up to my delighted eye, full of wiſhes, for the ſake of the pretty varlets, and for her own ſake, that I would deign to legitimate; that I would condeſcend to put on the nuptial fetters. 

LETTER XLVI. Mr.LOVELACE,ToJOHN BELFORD,Eſq
Monday, P. M.A Letter received from the worthy Captain Tomlinſon, has introduced me into the preſence of my charmer, ſooner than perhaps I ſhould otherwiſe have been admitted. 

Sullen her brow, at her firſt entrance into the dineing-room. But I took no notice of what had paſſed, and her anger ſlid away upon its own ice. 

'The Captain, after letting me know, that he choſe not to write, till he had the promiſed draught of the ſettlements, acquaints me, that his friend Mr. John Harlowe, in their firſt conference (which was held as ſoon as he got down), was extremely ſurprized, and even grieved (as he feared he would be) to hear, that we were not married. The world, he ſaid, who knew my character, would be very c•nſorious, were it owned, that we had lived ſo long together unmarried in the ſame lodgings; altho' our marriage were now to be ever ſo publicly celebrated.' 

'His nephew James, he was ſure, would make a great handle of it againſt any motion that might be made towards a reconciliation; and with the greaterſucceſs, as there was not a family in the kingdom more jealous of their honour than theirs.' 

This is true of the Harlowes, Jack: They have been calledThe proud Harlowes:And I have ever found, that all young Honour is ſupercilious and touchy. 

But ſeeſt thou not how right I was in my endeavour to perſuade my fair one to allow her uncle's friend to think us married; eſpecially as he camepreparedto believe it; and as her unclehopedit was ſo?—But nothing on earth is ſo perverſe, as a woman when ſhe is ſet upon carrying a point, and has ameekman, or one who loves hispeace,to deal with. 

My Beloved was vexed. She pulled out her handkerchief: But was more inclined to blame me, than herſelf. 

Had you kept your word, Mr. Lovelace, and left me when we came to town—And there ſhe ſtopt; for ſhe knew, that it was her own fault that we were not marry'd before we left the country; and how could I leave her afterwards, while her brother was plotting to carry her off by violence? 

Nor has he yet given over his machinations. 

For, as the Captain proceeds,'Mr. John Harlowe owned to him (but in confidence), that his nephew is at this time buſied in endeavouring to find out where we are; being aſſured, as I am not to be heard of at any of my relations, or at my uſual lodgings, that we are together. And that we are not married, is plain, as he will have it, from Mr. Hickman's application ſo lately made to her uncle; and which was ſeconded by Mrs. Norton to her mother. And he cannot bear, that I ſhould enjoy ſuch a triumph unmoleſted.' 

A profound ſigh, and the handkerchief again lifted to the eye. But did not the ſweet ſoul deſerve this turn upon her, for her felonious intention to rob me of herſelf? 

I read on to the following effect: 

'Why (Mr. Harlowe aſked) was it ſaid to his other inquiring friend, that weweremarried; and that by his niece's woman, who ought to know? Who could giveconvincingreaſons, no doubt'— 

Here again ſhe wept, took a turn croſs the room; then returned—Read on, ſaid ſhe— 

Will you, my deareſt life, read it yourſelf? 

I will take the letter with me, by-and-by—I cannotſeeto read it juſt now, wiping her eyes.—Read on—Let me hear it all—that I may know your ſentiments upon this letter, as well as give my own. 

'The Captain then told uncle John, the reaſons that induced me to give out that we were married; and the conditions on which my Beloved was brought to countenance it; which had kept us at the moſt punctilious diſtance. 

'But ſtill my character was inſiſted upon. And Mr. Harlowe went away diſſatisfied. And the Captain was alſo ſo much concerned, that he cared not to write what the reſult of this firſt conference was. 

'But in the next, which was held on receipt of the draughts, at his the Captain's houſe (as the former was, for the greater ſecrecy), when the old gentleman had read them, and had the Captain's opinion, he was much better pleaſed. And yet he declared, that it would not be eaſy to perſuade any other perſon of his family to believe ſo favourably of the matter, as he wasnowwilling to believe, were they to know, that we had lived ſo long together unmarried. 

'And then the Captain ſays, his dear friend made a propoſal:—It was this—That we ſhould marry〈◊〉of hand, but as privately as poſſible, as indeed h•found we intended(for he could have no objection to the draughts)—But yet, he expected to have pr•ſent one truſty friend of his own, for his better ſatiſfaction— 

Here I ſtopt, with a deſign to be angry—But ſhe deſiring me to read on, I obeyed.— 

'—Butthat it ſhould paſs to every one living, except to that truſty perſon, to himſelf, and to the Captain, that we were married from the time that we had lived together in one houſe; and that this time ſhould be made to agree with that of Mr. Hickman's application to him from Miſs Howe.' 

This, my deareſt life, ſaid I, is a very conſiderate propoſal. We have nothing to do, but to caution the people below properly on this head. I did not think your uncle Harlowe capable of ſuch an expedient. But you ſee how much his heart is in the reconciliation. 

This was the return I met with—You have always, as a mark of your politeneſs, let me know, howmeanlyyou think of every one of my family. 

Yet, thou wilt think, Belford, that I could forgive her for the reproach. 

'The Captain does not know, he ſays, how this propoſal will be reliſhed by us. But, for his part, he thinks it an expedient that will obviate many difficulties, and may poſſibly put an end to Mr. James Harlowe's further deſigns: And on this account he has, by the uncle's advice, already declared to two ſeveral perſons, by whoſe means it may come to that young gentleman's ears, that he (Captain Tomlinſon) has very great reaſon to believe, that we were married ſoon after Mr. Hickman's application was rejected. 

'And this, Mr. Lovelace (ſays the Captain), will enable you to pay a compliment to the family, that will not be unſuitable to the generoſity of ſome of the declarations you was pleaſed to make to the Lady before me (and which Mr. John Harlowe may make ſome advantage of in favour of a reconciliation); in that you have not demanded your lady's eſtate ſo ſoon as you were intitled to make the demand.'An excellent contriver ſurely ſhe muſt think this worthy Mr. Tomlinſon to be! 

'But the Captain adds, that if either the Lady or I diſapprove of his report of our marriage, he will retract it. Nevertheleſs he muſt tell me, that Mr. John Harlowe is very much ſet upon this way of proceeding; as the only one, in his opinion, capable of being improved into a general reconciliation. But if we do acquieſce in it, he beſeeches my fair one not to ſuſpend my day, that he may be authorized in what he ſays, as to the truth of the main fact [How conſcientious this good man!]: Nor muſt it be expected, he ſays, that her uncle will take one ſtep towards the wiſhed-for reconciliation, till theſolemnity is actually over. 

He adds,'that he ſhall be very ſoon in town on other affairs; and then propoſes to attend us, and give us a more particular account of all that paſſed, or ſhall further paſs, between Mr. Harlowe and him.' 

Well, my deareſt life, what ſay you to your uncle's expedient? Shall I write to the Captain, and acquaint him, that we have no objection to it? 

She was ſilent for a few minutes. At laſt, with a ſigh—See, Mr. Lovelace, ſaid ſhe, what you have brought me to, by treading after you in ſuch crooked paths!—See what diſgrace I have incurred!—Indeed you have not acted like a wiſe man. 

My beloved creature, do you not remember, how earneſtly I beſought the honour of your hand before we came to town?—Had I beenthenfavoured— 

Well, well, Sir—There has been much amiſs ſomewhere; that's all I will ſay at preſent. And ſince what's paſt cannot be recalled, my uncle muſt be obeyed, I think. 

Charmingly dutiful!—I had nothing then to do, that I might not be behindhand with the worthy Captain and her uncle, but to preſs for the day. This•fervently did. But (as I might have expected) her former anſwer was repeated, That when the ſettlements were completed; when the licence was actually obtained; it would be time enough to name the day: And, O Mr. Lovelace, ſaid ſhe, turning from me with a grace inimitably tender, her handkerchief at her eyes, what a happineſs, if my dear uncle could be prevailed upon to be perſonally a father, on this occaſion, tothe poor fatherleſs girl!— 

What's the matter with me!—Whence this dewdrop!—A tear!—As I hope to be ſaved, it is a tear, Jack!—Very ready methinks!—Only on reciting!—But her lively image was before me, in the very attitude ſhe ſpoke the words—And indeed at thetimeſhe ſpoke them, theſe lines of Shakeſpeare came into my head. 

Thy heart is big. Get thee apart, and weep!Paſſion, I ſee, is catching:—For my eyes,Seeing thoſe beads of ſorrow ſtand in thine,Begin to water—I withdrew, and wrote to the Captain to the following effect—'That he would be ſo good as to acquaint his dear friend, that we intirely acquieſced with what he had propoſed; and had alreadyproperlycautioned the gentlewomen of the houſe, and their ſervants, as well as our own: That if he would in perſon give me the bleſſing of his dear niece's hand, it would crown the wiſhes of both: That his own day, in this caſe, as I preſumed it would be a ſhort one, ſhould be ours: That by this means the ſecret would be in fewer hands: That I myſelf thought the ceremony could not be too privately performed; and this not only for the ſake of the wiſe end he had intended to be anſwered by it, but becauſe I would not have Lord M. think himſelf ſlighted; as he had once intended (as I had told him) to be our nuptial father, had we not declined his offer, in orderto avoid a public wedding; which his beloved niece would not come into, while ſhe was in diſgrace with her friends.—But that, if he choſe not to do us this honour, I wiſhed that Captain Tomlinſon might be the truſty perſon, whom he would have to be preſent on the happy occaſion.' 

I ſhewed this letter to my fair one. She was not diſpleaſed with it. So, Jack, we cannot now move too faſt, as to Settlements and Licenſe: The day is herUncle's day,orCaptain Tomlinſon'sperhaps, as ſhall beſt ſuit the occaſion. Miſs Howe's Smuggling ſcheme is now ſurely provided againſt in all events. 

But I will not by anticipation make thee a judge of all the benefits that may flow from this my elaborate contrivance. Why will theſe girls put me upon mymaſter-ſtrokes? 

And now for a little mine which I am getting ready to ſpring. Thefirſt,and at the rate I go on [now areſolution,and now aremorſe], perhaps thelaſt. 

Alittlemine, I call it. But it may be attended with great effects. I ſhall not, however, abſolutely depend upon the ſucceſs of it, having much more effectual ones in reſerve. And yet great engines are often moved by little ſprings. A ſmall ſpark falling by accident into a powder-magazine, has ſometimes done more execution, than an hundred cannon 

Come, the worſt to the worſt, thehymeneal torch,and awhite ſheet,muſt be myamende honorable,as the French have it. 

LETTER XLVII. Mr.BELFORD,ToROBERT LOVELACE,Eſq
Tueſday, June6.UNSUCCESSFUL as hitherto my application to thee has been, I cannot for the heart of me forbear writing once more in behalf of this admirablewoman: And yet am unable to account for the zeal which impels me to take her part with an earneſtneſs ſo ſincere. 

But all her merit thou acknowlegeſt; all thy own vileneſs thou confeſſeſt, and even glorieſt in it; what hope then of moving ſo harden'd a man?—Yet, as it is not too late, and thou art nevertheleſs upon the criſis, I am reſolved to try what another letter will do. It is but my writing in vain, if it do no good; and if thou wilt let me prevail, I know thou wilt hereafter think me richly intitled to thy thanks. 

Toarguewith thee would be folly. The caſe cannot require it. I will onlyintreatthee, therefore, that thou wilt not let ſuch an excellence loſe the reward of her vigilant virtue. 

I believe, there never were libertines ſo vile, but purpoſed, at ſome future period of their lives, to ſet about reforming; and let me beg of thee, that thou wilt, in this great article, make thy future repentance as eaſy, as ſome time hence thou wilt wiſh thouhadſtmade it. If thou proceedeſt, I have no doubt, that this affair will end tragically, one way or other. It muſt. Such a woman muſt intereſt both gods and men in her cauſe. But what I moſt apprehend, is, that with her own hand, in reſentment of the perpetrated outrage, ſhe (like another Lucretia) will aſſert the purity of her heart: Or, if her piety preſerve her from this violence, that waſting grief will ſoon put a period to her days. And in either caſe, will not the remembrance of thyever-duringguilt, andtranſitorytriumph, be a torment of torments to thee? 

'Tis a ſeriouſly ſad thing, after all, that ſo fine a creature ſhould have fallen into ſuch vile and remorſeleſs hands: For, from thy cradle, as I have heard thee own, thou ever delightedſt to ſport with and torment the animal, whether bird or beaſt, that thou lovedſt, and hadſt a power over. 

How different is the caſe of this fine woman fromthat of any other whom thou haſt ſeduced! I need not mention to thee, nor inſiſt upon the ſtriking difference: Juſtice, gratitude, thy intereſt, thy vows, all engaging thee; and thou certainly loving her, as far as thou art capable of love, above all her ſex. She not to be drawn aſide by art, or to be made to ſuffer from credulity, nor for want of wit and diſcernment (that will be another cutting reflection to ſo fine a mind as hers): The contention between you only unequal, as it is between naked innocence and armed guilt. In every thing elſe, as thou owneſt, her talents greatly ſuperior to thine!—What a fate will hers be, if thou art not at laſt overcome by thy reiterated remorſes! 

At firſt, indeed, when I was admitted into her preſenceSee VolIII.p.32•, and (till I obſerved her meaning air, and heard her ſpeak), I ſuppoſed that ſhe had no very uncommonjudgmentto boaſt of: For I made, as I thought, butjuſtallowances for her bloſſoming youth, and for that lovelineſs of perſon, and eaſineſs of dreſs, which I imagined muſt have taken up half her time and ſtudy to cultivate; and yet I had been prepared by thee to entertain a very high opinion of her ſenſe and her reading. Her choice of this gay fellow, upon ſuch hazardous terms (thought I), is a confirmation that herwitwants that maturity which onlyyearsandexperiencecan give it. Herknowlege(argued I to myſelf) muſt be alltheory; and the complaiſance ever conſorting with an age ſo green and ſo gay, will make ſo inexperienced a lady at leaſt forbear to ſhew herſelfdiſguſtedat freedoms of diſcourſe, in which thoſe preſent of her own ſex, and ſome of ours (ſo learned, ſo well read, and ſo travelled), allow themſelves. 

In this preſumption, I run on; and, having the advantage, as I conceited, of all the company but thee, and being deſirous to appear in her eyes a mighty clever fellow, I thought Iſhewed away,when I ſaid any fooliſh things that had more ſound than ſenſe〈◊〉them; and when I made ſilly jeſts, which attracted the ſmiles of thy Sinclair, and the ſpecious Partington; and that Miſs Harlowe did not ſmile too, I thought was owing to her youth or affectation, or to a mixture of both, perhaps to a greater command of her features.—Little dreamt I, that I was incurring her contempt all the time. 

But when, as I ſaid, I heard her ſpeak; which ſhe did not till ſhe had fathomed us all; when I heard her ſentiments on two or three ſubjects, and took notice of that ſearching eye, darting into the very inmoſt cells of our frothy brains, by my faith, it made me look about me; and I began to recollect, and be aſhamed of all I had ſaid before; in ſhort, was reſolved to ſit ſilent, till every one had talk'd round, to keep my folly in countenance. And then I raiſed the ſubjects that ſhecouldjoin in, and which ſhedidjoin in, ſo much to the confuſion and ſurprize of everyone of us!—For even thou, Lovelace, ſo noted for ſmart wit, repartee, and a vein of raillery, that delighteth all who come near thee, ſatteſt in palpable darkneſs, and lookedſt about thee, as well as we. 

One inſtance only, of this, ſhall I remind thee of? 

We talked ofwit,and ofwit,and aimed at it, bandying it like a ball from one to another of us, and reſting it chiefly with thee, who wert always proud enough and vain enough of the attribute; and then more eſpecially, as thou hadſt aſſembled us, as far as I know, principally to ſhew the lady thy ſuperiority over us; and us thy triumph over her. And then Tourville (who is always ſatisfied with wit at ſecond-hand; wit upon memory; other mens with), repeated ſome verſes, as applicable to the ſubject; which two of us applauded, tho' full of double entendre. Thou, ſeeing the lady's ſerious air on one of thoſe repetitions, appliedſt thyſelf to her, deſiring her notions of wit: A quality, thou ſaidſt, which every one prized, whether flowing from himſelf, or found in another. 

Then it was ſhe took all our attention:—It was a quality much talked of, ſhe ſaid, but, ſhe believed, very little underſtood:—At leaſt, if ſhe might be ſo free as to give her judgment of it, from what had paſſed in the preſent converſation, ſhe muſt ſay, that Wit with Gentlemen was one thing; with Ladies, another. 

This ſtartled us all:—How the women looked!—How they purſed in their mouths, a broad ſmile the moment before upon each, from the verſes they had heard repeated, ſo well underſtood, as we ſaw, by their looks—While I beſought her to let us know, for our inſtruction, what Wit was withLadies:For ſuch I was ſure itoughtto be, withGentlemen. 

Cowley, ſhe ſaid, had defined it prettily by negatives. 

Thou deſiredſt her to repeat his definition. 

She did; and with ſo much graceful eaſe, and beauty, and propriety of accent, as would have made bad poetry delightful. 

A thouſand diff'rent ſhapes it bears,Comely, in thouſand ſhapes appears.'Tis not atale:'Tis not ajeſt,Admir'd,with laughter,at afeaſt,Norflorid talk,which muſt this title gain:The proofs of wit forevermuſt remain.Much leſs can that have any placeAt which a virgin hides her face.Such droſs the fire muſt purge away:—'Tis juſtThe author bluſh there, where the reader muſt.Here ſhe ſtopt, looking round her upon us all with conſcious ſuperiority, as I thought. Lord! how we ſtar'd! Thou attemptedſt to give us thy definition of wit, that thou mighteſt have ſomething to ſay, and not ſeem to be ſurpriſed into ſilent modeſty. 

But, as if ſhe cared not to truſt thee with the ſubject, referring to the ſame author as for his more poſitivedeciſion, ſhe thus, with the ſame harmony of voice and accent, emphatically decided upon it. 

Wit,like a luxuriant vine,Unleſs toVirtue's prop it join,Firm and erect, tow'rd heaven bound,Tho' it with beauteous leaves and pleaſant fruit be crown'd;It lies deform'd, and rotting on the ground.If thou recollecteſt this part of the converſation, and how like fools we looked at one another: How much it put us out of conceit with ourſelves, and made usfearher; when we found our converſation thus excluded from the very character which our vanity had made us think unqueſtionably ours: And if thou profiteſt properly by the recollection, thou wilt be of my mind, that there is not ſo much wit in wickedneſs, as we had flattered ourſelves there was. 

And after all, I have been of opinion ever ſincethatconverſation, that the wit of all the rakes and libertines I ever convers'd with, from the brilliant Bob Lovelace down to little Johnny Hartop the punſter, conſiſts moſtly in ſaying bold and ſhocking things, with ſuch courage, as ſhall make Modeſt people bluſh, the Impudent laugh, and the Ignorant ſtare. 

And why doſt thou think I mention theſe things, ſo mal-à-propos, as it may ſeem?—Only, let me tell thee, as an inſtance, among many that might be given from the ſame evening's converſation, of this fine l•dy's ſuperiority in thoſe talents which ennoble nature, and dignify her ſex: Evidenced not only to each of us, as we offended, but to the flippant Partington, and the groſſer, but egregiouſly hypocritical Sinclair, in the correcting eye, the diſcouraging bluſh, in which was mixed as much diſpleaſure as modeſty, and ſometimes, as the occaſion called for it (for we were ſome of us hardened above the ſenſe of feelingdelicatereproof),by the ſovereign contempt, mingled with a diſdainful kind of pity, that ſhewed, at once, her own conſcious worthy, and our deſpicable worthleſneſs. 

O Lovelace! what then was the triumph, even in my eye, and what is it ſtill upon reflection, oftruemodeſty, oftruewit, andtruepoliteneſs, over frothy jeſt, laughing impertinence, and an obſcenity ſo ſhameful, even to the guilty, that they cannot hint at it but under a double meaning! 

Then, as thou haſt ſomewhere obſerved, all her correctivesavowedby her eye. Not poorly, like the generality of her ſex, affecting ignorance of meanings too obvious to be concealed; but ſo reſenting, as to ſhew each impudent laugher, the offence given to, and taken by, a purity, that had miſtaken its way, when it fell into ſuch company. 

Such is the woman, ſuch is the angel, whom thou haſt betrayed into thy power, and wouldſt deceive and ruin.—Sweet creature! did ſhe but know, how ſhe is ſurrounded (as I then thought as well as now think), and what isintended,how much ſooner would death be her choice, than ſo dreadful a ſituation!—And how effectually would her ſtory, were it generally known, warn all the Sex againſt throwing themſelves into the power of ours, let our vows, oaths, and proteſtations, be what they will! 

But let me beg of thee, once more, my dear Lovelace, if thou haſt any regard for thy honour, for the honour of thy family, for thy future peace, or for my opinion of thee (who yet pretend not to be ſo much moved by principle, as by that dazling merit, which ought ſtill more to attractthee), to be prevailed upon—to be—to behumane,that's all—Only, that thou wouldeſt not diſgrace our common humanity! 

Hardened as thou art, I know, that they are the abandoned people in the houſe who keep thee up to a reſolution againſt her. O that the ſagacious fair one,with ſo much innocent charity in her own heart, had not ſo reſolutely held thoſe women at diſtance!—That, as ſhe boarded there, ſhe had oftener tabled with them. Specious as they are, in a week's time, ſhe would have ſeen thro' them; they could not have been always ſo guarded, as they were when they ſaw her but ſeldom, and when they prepared themſelves to ſee her; and ſhe would have fled their houſe as a place infected. And yet, perhaps, with ſo determined an enterprizer, this diſcovery might have accelerated her ruin. 

I know that thou art nice in thy loves. But are there not hundreds of women, who, tho' not utterly abandoned, would be taken with thee for mereperſonalregards? Make a toy, if thou wilt, of principle, with regard to ſuch of the Sex as regard it as a toy; but rob not an angel of thoſe purities, which, in her own opinion, conſtitute the difference between angelic and brutal qualities. 

With regard to the paſſion itſelf, the leſs of ſoul in either man or woman, the more ſenſual are they. Thou, Lovelace, haſt a ſoul, tho' a corrupted one; and art more intent (as thou even glorieſt) upon the preparative ſtratagem, than upon the end of conquering. 

See we not the natural bent of idiots and the crazed?—The very appetite isbody; and when we ourſelves are moſt fools, and crazed, then are we moſt eager in theſe purſuits. See what fools this paſſion makes the wiſeſt men! What ſnivellers, what dotards, when they ſuffer themſelves to be run away with by it!—Anunpermanent paſſion!—Since, if (aſhamed of itsmore propername) we muſt call itLove, Love gratified, is Love ſatisfied—And Love ſatisfied, is Indifference begun.And this is the caſe whereconſenton one ſide adds to the obligation on the other. What then but remorſe can follow a forcible attempt? 

Do not even chaſte lovers chooſe to be alone in their courtſhip preparations, aſhamed to have even a child to witneſs to their fooliſh actions, and more fooliſh expreſſions?—Is this deified paſſion, in its greateſt altitudes, fitted to ſtand the day?—Do not the lovers, when mutual conſent awaits their wills, retire to coverts and to darkneſs, to complete their wiſhes? And ſhall ſuch a ſneaking paſſion as this, which can be ſo eaſily gratified by viler objects, be permitted to debaſe the nobleſt? 

Were not the delays of thy vile purpoſes owing more to the awe which her majeſtic virtue has inſpired thee with, than to thy want of adroitneſs in villainy [Imuſtwrite my free ſentiments in this caſe; for have I notſeenthe angel?]; I ſhould be ready to cenſure ſome of thy contrivances and pretences to ſuſpend the expected day, astrite, ſtale,and (to me, who know thy intention)poor; and too often reſorted to, as nothing comes of them, to be gloried in; particularly that of Mennell, the vapouriſh lady, and the ready-furniſhed houſe. 

She muſt have thought ſo too, at times, and in her heart deſpiſed thee for them, or love thee (ingrateful as thou art) to her misfortune; as well as entertain hope againſt probability. But this would afford another warning to the Sex, were they to know her ſtory; as it would ſhew them what poor pretences they muſtſeemto be ſatisfied with, if once they put themſelves into the power of a deſigning man. 

Iftrialonly was thy end, as once was thy pretenceSee Vol.III.Letterxvii., enough ſurely haſt thou tried this paragon of virtue and vigilance. But I knew thee too well, to expect, at thetime,that thou wouldeſt ſtop there. Men of our caſt, whenever they form a deſign upon any of the Sex, put no other bound to their views, than what want of power gives them. I knew, that from one advantage gained, thou wouldeſt proceed toattempt another. Thy habitual averſion to wedlock too well I knew; and indeed thou avoweſt thy hope to bring her tocohabitation,in that very letter in which thou pretendeſttrialto be thy principal viewVol.III.p.111, 112.. 

But do not even thy own frequent and involuntary remorſes, when thou haſt time, place, company, and every other circumſtance, to favour thee in thy wicked deſign, convince thee, that there can be no room for a hope ſo preſumptuous?—Why then, ſince thou wouldſt chooſe to marry her, rather than loſe her, wilt thou make her hate thee for ever? 

But if thou dareſt to meditateperſonaltrial, and art ſincere in thy reſolution to reward her, as ſhe behaves in it, let me beſeech thee to remove her from this vile houſe: That will be to give her and thy conſcience fair play. So intirely now does the ſweet deluded excellence depend upon her ſuppoſed happier proſpects, that thou needeſt not to fear that ſhe will fly from thee, or that ſhe will wiſh to have recourſe to that ſcheme of Miſs Howe, which has put thee upon what thou calleſt thymaſter-ſtrokes. 

But whatever be thy determination on this head; and if I write not in time, but that thou haſt actually pulled off the maſk; let it not be one of thy devices, if thou wouldſt avoid the curſes of every heart, and hereafter of thy own, to give her, no not for one hour (be her reſentment ever ſo great), into the power of that villainous woman, who has, if poſſible, leſs remorſe than thyſelf; and whoſetradeit is to break the reſiſting ſpirit, and utterly to ruin the heart unpractiſed in evil.—O Lovelace, Lovelace, how many dreadful ſtories could this horrid woman tell the Sex! And ſhall that of Miſs Clariſſa Harlowe ſwell the guilty liſt? 

But this I might have ſpared. Of this, devil asthou art, thou canſt not be capable. Thou couldſt not enjoy a triumph ſo diſgraceful to thy wicked pride, as well as to humanity. 

Shouldſt thou think, that the melancholy ſpectacle hourly before me has made me more ſerious than uſual, perhaps thou wilt not be miſtaken. But nothing more is to be inferr'd from hence (were I even to return to my former courſes), but that whenever the time of cool reflection comes, whether brought on by our own diſaſters, or by thoſe of others, we ſhall undoubtedly, if capable of thought, and if we have time for it, think in the ſame manner. 

We neither of us are ſuch fools, as to diſbelieve a futurity, or to think, whatever be our practice, that we came hither by chance, and for no end but to do all the miſchief that we have in our power to do.—Nor am I aſhamed to own, that in the prayers which my poor uncle makes me read to him, in the abſence of a very good clergyman, who regularly attends him, I do not forget to put in a word or two for myſelf. 

If, Lovelace, thou laugheſt at me, thy ridicule will be more conformable to thyactions,than to thybelief.—Devils believe and tremble.Canſt thou be more abandoned than they? 

And here let me add, with regard to my poor old man, that I often wiſh thee preſent but for one half hour in a day, to ſee the dregs of a gay life running off in the moſt excruciating tortures, that the colic, the ſtone, and the gangrene, can unitedly inflict; and to hear him bewail the diſſoluteneſs of his paſt life, in the bittereſt anguiſh of a ſpirit every hour expecting to be called to its laſt account.—Yet, by all his confeſſions, he has not to accuſe himſelf in ſixty-ſeven years of life, of half theveryvile enormities, which you and I have committed in the laſt ſeven only. 

I conclude with recommending to thy ſerious conſiderationall I have written, as proceeding from the heart and ſoul of 

Thy aſſured friend,JOHN BELFORD.LETTER XLVIII. Mr.LOVELACE,ToJOHN BELFORD,Eſq
Tueſday, P. M. June6.DIfficulties ſtill to be got over in procuring this plaguy licence. I ever hated, and ever ſhall hate, theſe ſpiritual lawyers, and their court. 

And now, Jack, if I have not ſecuredvictory,I have aretreat. 

But hold—Thy ſervant with a letter— 

A confounded long one! tho' not a narrative one—Once more in behalf of the lady.—Lie thee down, oddity! What canſt thou write that can have force upon me at this criſis?—And have I not, as I went along, made thee to ſay all that was neceſſary for thee to ſay? 

Yet once more, I'll take thee up. 

Trite, ſtale, poor(ſay'ſt thou) are ſome of my contrivances? That of the widow's particularly!—I have no patience with thee.—Had not that contrivance its effect at the time, for a procraſtination?—And had I not then reaſon to fear, that ſhe would find enough to make her diſlike this houſe? And was it not right (intending what I intended) to lead her on from time o•time, with a notion, that a houſe of her own would be ready for her ſoon, in order to induce her to continue here till it was? 

Trite, ſtale,andpoor!—Thou art a ſilly fellow, and no judge, when thou ſayeſt this. Had I not, like a blockhead, revealed to thee, as Iwent along,the ſecret purpoſes of my heart, but had kept all in, tillthe event had explained my myſteries, I would have defy'd thee to have been able, any more than the lady, to have gueſſed at what was to befal her, till it had actually come to paſs. Nor doubt I, in this caſe, that, inſtead of preſuming to reflect upon her for credulity, asloving me to her misfortune,and forhoping againſt probability,thou wouldeſt have been readier by far, to cenſure her for nicety and over-ſcrupulouſneſs. And let me tell thee, that had ſhe loved me, as I wiſhed her to love me, ſhe could not poſſibly have been ſo very apprehenſive of my deſigns; nor ſo ready to be influenced by Miſs Howe's precautions, as ſhe has always been, altho' my general character made not for me with her. 

But in thy opinion, I ſuffer for that ſimplicity in my contrivances, which is their principal excellence. No machinery make I neceſſary. No unnatural flights aim I at. All pure nature, taking advantage of nature, as nature tends; and ſo ſimple my devices, that when they are known, thou, even thou, imagineſt, thou couldeſt have thought of the ſame. And indeed thou ſeemeſt toown,that the ſlight thou putteſt upon them, is owing to my letting thee into them beforehand; undiſtinguiſhing, as well as ingrateful as thou art! 

Yet, after all, I would not have thee think, that I do not know my weak places. I have formerly told thee, that it is difficult for the ableſt general to ſay what hewilldo, or what hecando, when he is obliged to regulate his motions by thoſe of a watchful enemyVol.III.p.192.. If thou giveſt due weight to this conſideration, thou wilt not wonder that I ſhould make many marches and countermarches, ſome of which may appear to a ſlight obſerver unneceſſary. 

But let me curſorily enter into this debate with thee on this ſubject, now I am within ſight of my journey's end. 

Abundance of impertinent things thou telleſt me in this letter; ſome of which thou hadſt from myſelf; others that I knew before. 

All that thou ſayeſt in this charming creature's praiſe, is ſhort of what I have ſaid and written, on this inexhauſtible ſubject. 

Her virtue, her reſiſtance, which are her merits, are myſtimulatives.Have I not told thee ſo twenty times over? 

Devil,as theſe girls between them call me, what of devil am I, but in mycontrivances?I am not more a devil, than others, in theendI aim at; for when I have carried my point, it is ſtill butoneſeduction. And I have perhaps been ſpared the guilt of many ſeductions, in the time. 

What of uncommon would there be in this caſe, but for her watchfulneſs?—As well as I love intrigue and ſtratagem, doſt think, that I had not rather have gained my end with leſs trouble and leſs guilt? 

The man, let me tell thee, who is as wicked as hecanbe, is a worſe man than I am. Let me aſk any Rake in England, if, reſolving to carry his point, he would have been ſo long about it? or have had ſo much compunction as I have had? 

Were every Rake, nay, were every Man, to ſit down, as I do, and write all that enters into his head or into his heart, and to accuſe himſelf with equal freedom and truth, what an army of miſcreants ſhould I have to keep me in countenance! 

It is a maxim with ſome, that if they are left alone with a woman, and make not an attempt upon her, ſhe will think herſelf affronted.—Are not ſuch men as theſe worſe than I am?—What an opinion muſt they have of the whole Sex? 

Let me defend the Sex I ſo dearly love.—If theſe elder brethren of ours, thirſk they have general reaſon for their aſſertion, they muſt have kept very bad company, or muſt judge of womens hearts by theirown. She muſt be an abandoned woman, who will not ſhrink as a ſnail into its ſhell, at a groſs and ſudden attempt. A modeſt woman muſt be naturally cold, reſerved, and ſhy. She cannot be ſo much, and ſo ſoon affected, as libertines are apt to imagine; and muſt, at leaſt, have ſome confidence in the honour and ſilence of a man, before deſire can poſſibly put forth in her, to encourage and meet his flame. For my own part, I have been always decent in the company of women, till I was ſure of them. Nor have I ever offered agreatoffence, till I have foundlittleones paſſed over; and that they ſhunn'd me not, when they knew my character. 

My divine Clariſſa has puzzled me, and beat me out of my play: At one time, I hoped to overcome byintimidatingher, at another byLove; by the amorousSee-ſaw,as I have called itVol.III.p.99.. And I have only now to joinſurprizeto the other two, and ſee what can be done by all three. 

And whoſe property, I pray thee, ſhall I invade, if I purſue my ſchemes of love and vengeance?—Have not thoſe who have a right in her, renounced that right?—Have they not wilfully expoſed her to dangers?—Yet muſt know, that ſuch a woman would be conſidered as lawful prize, by as many as could have the opportunity to attempt her?—And had they not thus cruelly expoſed her, is ſhe not aſingle woman?—And need I tell thee, Jack, that men of our caſt, thebeſtof them [theworſtſtick at nothing] think it a great grace and favour done to the married men, if they leave them their wives to themſelves; and compound for their ſiſters, daughters, wards, and nieces?—Shocking as theſe principles muſt be to a reflecting mind; yet ſuch thou knoweſt are the principles of thouſands (who would not act by the Sex as I have acted by them, when in my power); and as often carried into practice, as their opportunitiesor courage will permit.—Such therefore have no right to blame me. 

Thou repeatedly pleadeſt her ſufferings from her family. But I have too often anſwered this plea, to need to ſay any more now, than that ſhe has not ſuffered formy ſake.For has ſhe not been made the victim of the malice of her rapacious brother and envious ſiſter, who only waited for an occaſion to ruin her with her other relations; and took this as the firſt, to drive her out of the houſe; and, as it happen'd, into my arms?—Thou knoweſt how muchagainſt her inclination. 

As for herownſins, how many has the dear creature to anſwer for toLoveand tome!—Twenty, and twenty times twenty, has ſhe not told me, that ſhe refuſed not the odious Solmes in favour to me? And as often has ſhe not offered to renounce me for the ſingle life, if the Implacables would have received her on that condition?—What repetitions does thy weak pity make me guilty of? 

To look a little farther back: Canſt thou forget what my ſufferings were from this haughty beauty, in the whole time of my attendance upon her proud motions, in the purlieus of Harlowe-Place, and at the little White Hart at Neale, as we called it?—Did I not threaten vengeance upon her then (and had I not reaſon?) for diſappointing me [I will give but this one inſtance] of a promiſed interview? 

O Jack! what a night had I of it, in the bleak coppice adjoining to her father's paddock!—My linen and wig frozen; my limbs abſolutely numbed; my fingers only ſenſible of ſo much warmth, as enabled me to hold a pen; and that obtained by rubbing the ſkin off, and beating with my hands my ſhivering ſides.—Kneeling on the hoar moſs on one knee, writing on the other, if the ſtiff ſcrawl could be called writing.—My feet, by the time I had done, ſeeming to have taken root, and actually unable to ſupportme for ſome minutes!—Love and Rage kept then my heart in motion (and only Love and Rage could do it), or how much more than Ididſuffer, muſt I have ſuffered? 

I told thee, at my melancholy return, what were the contents of the letter I wroteVol.II.p.118.. And I ſhewed thee afterwards, her tyrannical anſwer to itVol.III.p.120.. Thou then, Jack, lovedſt thy friend; and pitiedſt thy poor ſuffering Lovelace. Even the affronted God of Love approved then of my threatened vengeance againſt the fair promiſer; tho' now with thee, in the day of my power, forgetful of the night of my ſufferings, he is become an advocate for her. 

Nay, was it not he himſelf that brought to me my adorableNemeſis; and both together put me upon this very vow,'That I would never reſt, till I had drawn in this goddeſs-daughter of the Harlowes, to cohabit with me; and that in the face of all their proud family?'—Nor canſt thou forget this vow.—At this inſtant I have thee before me, as then thou ſorrowfully lookedſt. 

Thy ſtrong features glowing with compaſſion for me; thy lips twiſted; thy forehead furrowed; thy whole face drawn out from the ſtupid round into the ghaſtly oval; every muſcle contributing its power to complete the aſpect grievous; and not one word couldſt thou utter, butAmento my vow. 

And what of diſtinguiſhing love, or favour, or confidence, have I had from her ſince, to make me forego this vow? 

Irenewedit not, indeed, afterwards; and actually for a long ſeaſon, was willing to forget it; till repetitions of the ſame faults revived the remembrance of the former:—And now adding to thoſe the contents of ſome of Miſs Howe's virulent letters, ſo lately come at, what canſt thou ſay for the rebel, conſiſtent with thy loyalty to thy friend? 

Every man to his genius and conſtitution. Hannibal was calledThe father of warlike ſtratagems.Had Hannibal been a private man, and turned his plotting head againſt theother ſex; or had I been a general, and turned mine againſt ſuch of my fellow-creatures ofmy own,as I thought myſelf intitled to conſider as my enemies, becauſe they were born and l•ved in a different climate;—Hannibal would have done leſs miſchief;—Lovelace more.—That would have been the difference. 

Not a ſovereign on earth, if he be not agood man,and if he be of a warlike temper, but muſt do a thouſand times more miſchief than me. And why? Becauſe he has it in hispowerto do more. 

An honeſt man, perhaps thou'lt ſay, will not wiſh to have it in his power to do hurt. Heought not,let me tell him: For, if he have it, a thouſand to one but it makes him both wanton and wicked. 

In what, then, am I ſoſingularlyvile? 

In mycontrivances,thou'lt ſay (for thou art my echo), if not in my propoſedendof them. 

How difficult does every man find it, as well as me, to forego a predominant paſſion? I have three paſſions that ſway me by turns; all imperial ones. Love, Revenge, Ambition, or a deſire of conqueſt. 

As to this particular contrivance of Tomlinſon and the Uncle, which thou'lt think a black one perhaps; that had been ſpared, had not theſeinnocentladies put me upon finding a huſband for their Mrs. Townſend: That device, therefore, is but apreventiveone. Thinkeſt thou, that I could bear to be outwitted? And may not this very contrivance ſave a world of miſchief? for, doſt thou think, I would have tamely given up the lady to Townſend's Tars? 

What meaneſt thou, except to overthrow thy own plea, when thou ſayeſt,that men of our caſt know no other bound to their wickedneſs, but want of power; yet knoweſt this lady to be in mine? 

Enough,ſayeſt thou,have I tried this paragon of virtue.Not ſo; for I have not tried her at all.—All I have been doing, is but preparation to a trial. 

But thou art concerned for themeansthat I may have recourſe to in thetrial,and for myveracity. 

Silly fellow!—Did ever any man, thinkeſt thou, deceive a girl, but at the expence of his veracity? How otherwiſe, can he be ſaid todeceive? 

As to themeans,thou doſt not imagine, that I expect adirectconſent.—My main hope is but in a yielding reluctance; without which I will be ſworn, whatever rapes have been attempted, none ever were committed, one perſon to one perſon. And good Queen Beſs of England, had ſhe been living, and appealed to, would have declared herſelf of my mind. 

It would not be amiſs for the Sex to know, what our opinions are upon this ſubject.—I love to warn them.—I wiſh no man to ſucceed with them but myſelf. I told thee once, thattho' a rake, I am not a rake's friendVol.III.p.111.. 

Thou ſayeſt, that I ever hated wedlock. And true thou ſayeſt. And yetastrue, when thou telleſt me, that Iwould rather marry than loſe this lady.Andwill ſhe deteſt me for ever,thinkeſt thou, if I try her, and ſucceed not?—Take care—Take care, Jack!—Seeſt thou not, that thou warneſt me, that I do not try, without reſolving to conquer? 

I muſt add, that I have for ſome time been convinced, that I have done wrong, to ſcribble to thee ſo freely as I have done (and the more ſo, if I make the Lady legally mine); for has not every letter I have written to thee, been a bill of indictment againſt myſelf? I may partly curſe my vanity for it; and I think I will refrain for the future; for thou art really very impertinent. 

A good man, I own, might urge many of the things thou urgeſt; but, by my ſoul, they come veryaukwardly from thee. And thou muſt be ſenſible, that I can anſwer every tittle of what thou writeſt, upon the foot of themaxims we have long held and purſued.—By the ſpecimen above, thou wilt ſee that I can. 

And pr'ythee tell me, Jack, what but this that follows would have been the epitome of mine and my beloved's ſtory,after ten years cohabitation; had I never written to thee upon the ſubject, and had I not been my own accuſer? 

'Robert Lovelace, a notorious woman-eater, makes his addreſſes in an honourable way to Miſs Clariſſa Harlowe; a young lady of the higheſt merit.'—Fortunes on both ſides out of the queſtion. 

'After encouragement given, he is inſulted by her violent brother; who thinks it his intereſt to diſcountenance the match; and who at laſt challenging him, is obliged to take his worthleſs life at his hands. 

'The family, as much enraged, as if he hadtakenthe life hegave,inſult him perſonally, and find out an odious lover for the young lady. 

'To avoid a forced marriage, ſhe is prevailed upon 'to throw herſelf into Mr. Lovelace's protection. 

'Yet, diſclaiming any paſſion for him, ſhe repeatedly offers to renounce him for ever, if, on that condition, her relations will receive her, and free her from the addreſs of the hated lover. 

'Mr. Lovelace, a man of ſtrong paſſions, and, as ſome ſay, of great pride, thinks himſelf under very little obligation to her on this account; and not being naturally fond of marriage, and having ſo much reaſon to hate her relations, endeavours to prevail upon her to live with him, what he callsthe life of honour:And at laſt, by ſtratagem, art, and contrivance, prevails. 

'He reſolves never to marry any other woman: Takes a pride to have her called by his name: A Church-rite all the difference between them:Treats her with deſerved tenderneſs. Nobody queſtions their marriage but theſe proud relations of hers whom he wiſhes to queſtion it. Every year a charming boy. Fortunes to ſupport the increaſing family with ſplendor—A tender father. Always a warm friend; a generous landlord, and a punctual paymaſter—Now-and-then, however, perhaps, indulging with a new object, in order to bring him back with greater delight to his charming Clariſſa—His only fault Love of the Sex—Which nevertheleſs, the women ſay, will cure itſelf—Defenſible thus far, that he breaks no contracts by his roveings— 

And what is there ſo very greatly amiſs, as the world goes, in all this?— 

Let me aver, that there are thouſands and ten thouſands, who have worſe ſtories to tell than this would appear to be, had I not intereſted thee in the progreſs to my great end. And beſides, thou knoweſt that the character I gave myſelf to Joſeph Leman, as to my treatment of my miſtreſſes, is pretty near the truthVol.III.p.233.. 

Were I to be as much in earneſt in my defence, as thou art warm in my arraignment, I could convince thee, by other arguments, obſervations, and compariſons [Is not all human good and evil comparative?] that tho' from my ingenuous temper (writing only to thee, who art maſter of every ſecret of my heart) I am ſo ready to accuſe myſelf in my narrations; yet I have ſomething to ſayformyſelftomyſelf, as I go along; tho' no one elſe, perhaps, that was not a rake, would allow any weight to it.—And this caution might I give to thouſands, who would ſtoop for a ſtone to throw at me:'See that your ownpredominant paſſions,whatever they be, hurry you not into as much wickedneſs, asminedome.—See, if ye happen to be better than me, inſome things, that ye are not worſe in others; and in points too, that may be of more extenſive bad conſequence, than that of ſeducing a girl (and taking care of her afterwards), who from her cradle is armed with cautions againſt the deluſions of men.'And yet I am not ſo partial to my own faults, as to think lightly ofthat,when I allow myſelf to think. 

Another grave thing will I add, now my hand's in:'So dearly do I love the ſex, that had I found, that a character for virtue had been generally neceſſary to recommend me to them, I ſhould have had a much greater regard to my morals, as to the ſex, than I have had.' 

To ſum up all—I am ſufficiently apprized, that men of worthy and honeſt hearts, who never allowed themſelves inpremeditatedevil, and who take into the account the excellencies of this fine creature, will, and muſt, not only condemn, butabhorme, were they to know as much of me as thou doſt.—But, methinks, I would be glad to eſcape the cenſure of thoſe men, and of thoſe women too, who have never known what capital trials and temptations are; who have no genius for enterprize; and moſt particularly of thoſe, who have only kept their ſecret better than I have kept, or wiſhed to keep, mine. 

I THREATENED above to refrain writing to thee. But take it not to heart, Jack—I muſt write on, and cannot help it. 

LETTER XLIX. Mr.LOVELACE,ToJOHN BELFORD,Eſq
Wedneſday Night,11o'Clock.FAITH, Jack, thou hadſt half undone me with thy nonſenſe, tho' I would not own it in my yeſterday's letter; my conſcience of thy party before. But I think I am my own man again. 

So near to execution my plot! So near ſpringing my mine! All agreed upon between the women and me, or I believe thou hadſt overthrown me. 

I have time for a few lines preparative to what is to happen in an hour or two; and I love to write to the moment.— 

We have been extremely happy. How many agreeable days have we known together! What may the next two hours produce!— 

When I parted with my charmer (which I did with infinite reluctance, half an hour ago), it was upon her promiſe, that ſhe would not ſit up to write or read. For ſo engaging was the converſation to me (and, indeed, my behaviour throughout the whole of it, was confeſſedly agreeable to her), that I inſiſted, if ſhe did not directly retire to reſt, that ſhe ſhould add another happy hour to the former. 

To have ſat up writing or reading half the night, as ſhe ſometimes does, would have fruſtrated my view, as thou wilt obſerve, when my little plot unravels. 

WHAT—What—What now!—bounding villain! wouldſt thou choak me!— 

I was ſpeaking to my heart, Jack!—It was then at my throat.—And what is all this for?—Theſe ſhy ladies, how, when a man thinks himſelf near the mark, do they tempeſt him!— 

Is all ready, Dorcas? Has my beloved kept her word with me?—Whether are theſe billowy heavings owing more to Love or to Fear? I cannot tell for the ſoul of me, which I have moſt of. If I can but take her before her apprehenſion, before her eloquence, i•awake— 

Limbs, why thus convulſed!—Knees, till now ſo firmly knit, why thus relaxed? Why beat ye thus together? Will not theſe trembling fingerswhich twice have refuſed to direct the pen, and thus curvedly deform the paper, fail-me-in the arduous moment? 

Once again, Why and for what all theſe convulſions? This project is not to end in matrimony ſurely! 

But the conſequences muſt be greater than I had thought of till this moment—My beloved's deſtiny or my own may depend upon the iſſue of the two next hours!— 

I will recede, I think!— 

SOFT, O virgin ſaint, and ſafe as ſoft, be thy ſlumbers!— 

I will now once more turn to my friend Belford's letter. Thou ſhalt have fair play, my charmer. I'll re-peruſe what thy advocate has to ſay for thee. Weak arguments will do, in the frame I am in!— 

BUT, what's the matter!—What's the matter!—What adouble—But the uproar abates!—What adouble cowardam I?—Or is it that I am taken in a cowardly minute? for heroes have their fits offear; cowards theirbravemoments: And virtuous ladies, all but my Clariſſa, their momentcritical— 

But thus coolly enjoying thy reflections in a hurricane!—Again the confuſion's renew'd!— 

What! Where!—How came it!— 

Is my beloved ſafe!— 

O wake not too roughly my beloved!— 

LETTER L. Mr.LOVELACE,ToJOHN BELFORD,Eſq
Thurſday morning, Five o'clock (June8.)NOW is my reformation ſecur'd; for I never ſhall love any other woman!—O ſhe is all variety! She muſt be ever new to me!—Imaginationcannotform; much leſs can the pencil paint; nor can the ſoul of painting,poetry,deſcribe an angel ſo exquiſitely, ſo elegantly lovely!—But I will not by anticipation pacify thy impatience. Altho' the ſubject is too hallowed for profane contemplation; yet ſhalt thou have the whole before thee as it paſſed: And this not from a ſpirit wantoning in deſcription upon ſo rich a ſubject; but with a deſign to put a bound to thy roving thoughts.—It will be iniquity greater than a Lovelace ever was guilty of, to carry them farther than I ſhall acknowlege. 

Thus then, connecting my laſt with the preſent, I lead to it. 

Didſt thou not, by the concluſion of my former, perceive the conſternation I was in, juſt as I was about to re-peruſe thy letter, in order to prevail upon myſelf to recede from my purpoſe of awaking in terrors my ſlumbering charmer? And what doſt thou think was the matter? 

I'll tell thee— 

At a little after two, when the whole houſe was ſtill, or ſeem'd to be ſo, and, as it proved, my Clariſſa abed, and faſt aſleep; I alſo in a manner undreſſed, for an hour before, and in my gown and ſlippers, tho', to oblige thee, writing on;—I was alarm'd by a trampling noiſe over head, and a confuſed buz of mix'd voices, ſome louder than others, like ſcolding, and little ſhort of ſcreaming, all raiſed to vocatives, as in a fright: And while I was wondering what could be the matter, down ſtairs ran Dorcas, and at my door, in an accent rather frightedly and hoarſly inward, than ſhrilly clamorous, cried out Fire! Fire! And this the more alarmed me, as ſhe ſeem'd to endeavour to cry out louder, but could not. 

My pen (its laſt ſcrawl a benediction on my beloved) dropt from my fingers; and up ſtarted I; and making but three ſteps to the door, open'd it, and cry'd Where! Where! almoſt as much terrify'd asthe wench. While ſhe, more than half-undreſt, her perticoats in her hand, unable to ſpeak diſtinctly, pointed up ſtairs. 

I was there in a moment, and found all owing to the careleſſneſs of Mrs. Sinclair's cook-maid, who, having ſat up to read the ſimple hiſtory of Doraſtus and Fau•ia, when ſhe ſhould have been in bed, had ſet fire to an old pair of callicoe window-curtains. 

She had had the preſence of mind, in her fright, to tear down the half-burnt vallens, as well as curtains, and had got them, tho' blazing, into the chimney, by the time I came up; ſo that I had the ſatisfaction to find the danger happily over. 

Mean time Dorcas, after ſhe had directed me up ſtairs, not knowing the worſt was over, and expecting every minute the houſe would be in a blaze, out of tender regard for her lady [I ſhall for ever love the wench for it] ran to her door, and rapping loudly at it, in a recovered voice, cry'd out, with a ſhrilneſs equal to her love, Fire! Fire!—The houſe is on fire!—Riſe, Madam!—This inſtant riſe—if you would not be burnt in your bed! 

No ſooner had ſhe made this dreadful outcry, but I heard her lady's door, with haſty violence, unbar, unbolt, unlock, and open, and my charmer's voice ſounding like that of one going into a fit. 

You may believe how much I was affected. I trembled with concern for her, and haſtened down faſter than the alarm of fire had made me run up, in order to ſatisfy her, that all the danger was over. 

When I hadflown downto her chamber-door, there I beheld the charmingeſt creature in the world, ſupporting herſelf on the arm of the gaſping Dorcas, ſighing, trembling, and ready to faint, with nothing on but an under-petticoat, her lovely boſom half-open, and her feet juſt ſlipt into her ſhoes. As ſoon as ſhe ſaw me, ſhe panted, and ſtruggled to ſpeak;but could only ſay, Oh, Mr. Lovelace! and down was ready to ſink. 

I claſped her in my arms with an ardor ſhe never felt before: My deareſt life! fear nothing: I have been up—The danger is over—The fire is got under—And how (fooliſh devil! to Dorcas) could you thus, by your hideous yell, alarm and frighten my angel! 

Oh Jack! how her ſweet boſom, as I claſp'd her to mine, heav'd and panted! I could even diſtinguiſh her dear heart flutter, flutter, flutter, againſt mine; and for a few minutes, I fear'd ſhe would go into fits. 

Leſt the half-lifeleſs charmer ſhould catch cold in this undreſs, I lifted her to her bed, and ſat down by her upon the ſide of it, endeavouring with the utmoſt tenderneſs, as well of action as expreſſion, to diſſipate her terrors. 

But what did I get by this my generous care of her, and by myſucceſsfulendeavour to bring her to herſelf?—Nothing, ungrateful as ſhe was! but the moſt paſſionate exclamations: For we had both already forgot the occaſion, dreadful as it was, which had thrown her into my arms; I, from the joy of incircling the almoſt diſrobed body of the lovelieſt of her ſex; ſhe, from the greater terrors that aroſe from finding herſelf in my arms, and both ſeated on the bed, from which ſhe had been ſo lately frighted. 

And now, Belford, reflect upon the diſtance the watchful charmer had hitherto kept me at. Reflect upon my love, and upon my ſufferings for her: Reflect upon her vigilance, and how long I had lain in wait to elude it; the awe I had ſtood in, becauſe of her frozen virtue and over-niceneſs; and that I never before was ſo happy with her; and then think how•ngovernable muſt be my tranſports in thoſe happy moments!—And yet, in my own account, I was both decent and generous. The following lines, alter'd to the fi•ſt perſon, come neareſt of any I can recollect, to the rapturous occaſion:Bowing, I kneel'd, and her forc'd hand I preſs'd,With ſweet compulſion, to my beating breaſt;O'er it, in ecſtaſy, my lips bent low,And tides of ſighs 'twixt her graſp'd fingers flow.High beat my hurry'd pulſe, at each fierce kiſs,And ev'ry burning ſinew ak'd with bliſs. 

But, far from being affected by an addreſs ſo fervent (although from a man ſhe had ſo lately owned a regard for, and with whom, but an hour or two before, ſhe had parted with ſo much ſatisfaction), that•never ſaw a bitterer, or more moving grief, when ſhe came fully to herſelf. 

She appealed to Heaven againſt mytreachery,as ſhe called it; while I, by the moſt ſolemn vows, pleaded my own equal fright, and the reality of the danger that had alarmed us both. 

She conjur'd me, in the moſt ſolemn and affecting manner, by turns threatening and ſoothing, to quit her apartment, and permit her to hide herſelf from the light, and from every human eye. 

I beſought her pardon, yet could not avoid offending; and repeatedly vow'd, that the next morning's ſun ſhould witneſs our eſpouſals: But taking, I ſuppoſe, all my proteſtations of this kind, as an indication, that I intended to proceed to the laſt extremity, ſhe would hear nothing that I ſaid; but, redoubling her ſtruggles to get from me, in broken accents, and exclamations the moſt vehement, ſhe proteſted, that ſhe would not ſurvive, what ſhe called a treatment ſo diſgraceful and villainous; and, looking all wildly round her, as if for ſome inſtrument of miſchief, ſhe eſpied a pair of ſharp-pointed ſciſſars on a chair by the bed-ſide, and endeavoured to catch them up, with deſign to make her words good on the ſpot. 

Seeing her deſperation, I begged her to be pacify'd; that ſhe would hear me ſpeak but one word, declaring that I intended no diſhonour to her: And having ſeizedthe ſciſſars, I threw them into the chimney; and ſhe ſtill inſiſting vehemently upon my diſtance, I permitted her to take the chair. 

But, O the ſweet diſcompoſure!—Her bared ſhoulders and arms, ſo inimitably fair and lovely: Her ſpread hands croſſed over her charming neck; yet not half concealing its gloſſy beauties: The ſcanty coat, as ſhe roſe from me, giving the whole of her admirable ſhape, and fine-turn'd limbs: Her eyes running-over, yet ſeeming to threaten future vengeance: And at laſt her lips uttering what every indignant look, and glowing feature, portended; exclaiming as if I had done the worſt I could do, and vowing never to forgive me; wilt thou wonder, that I could avoid reſuming the incenſed, the already too-much-provoked fair one? 

I did; and claſped her once more to my boſom: But, conſidering the delicacy of her frame, her force was amazing, and ſhewed how much in earneſt ſhe was in her reſentment; for it was with the utmoſt difficulty that I was able to hold her: Nor could I prevent her ſliding through my arms, to fall upon her knees: Which ſhe did at my feet: And there, in the anguiſh of her ſoul, her ſtreaming eyes lifted up to my face with ſupplicating ſoftneſs, hands folded, diſhevelled hair; for her night head-dreſs having fallen off in her ſtruggling, her charming treſſes fell down in naturally ſhining ringlets, as if officious to conceal the dazling beauties of her neck and ſhoulders; her lovely boſom too heaving with ſighs, and broken ſobs, as if to aid her quivering lips, in pleading for her—In this manner, but when her grief gave way to her ſpeech, in words pronounced with that emphatical propriety, which diſtinguiſhes this admirable creature in her elocution from all the women. I ever heard ſpeak; did ſhe implore my compaſſion, and my honour. 

'Conſider me,dearLovelace,' were her charmingwords! 'on my knees I beg you to conſider me, as a poor creature who has no protector but you; who has no defence but your honour: By that Honour! By your Humanity! By all you have vow'd! I conjure you not to make me abhor myſelf! Not to make me vile in my own eyes!' 

I mentioned the morrow as the happieſt day of my life. 

Tell me not of to-morrow; if indeed you mean me honourably,Now,This very inſtant NOW! you muſt ſhew it, and begone! You can never in a whole long life repair the evils you may NOW make me ſuffer! 

Wicked wretch!—Inſolent villain!—[Yes, ſhe called me inſolent villain, altho' ſo much in my power! And for what?—only for kiſſing (with paſſion indeed) her inimitable neck, her lips, her cheeks, her forehead, and her ſtreaming eyes, as this aſſemblage of beauties offered itſelf at once to my raviſhed ſight; ſhe continuing kneeling at my feet, as I ſat]. 

If Iama villain, Madam—And then my graſping but trembling hand—I hope I did not hurt the tendereſt and lovelieſt of all her beauties—If I am a villain, Madam— 

She tore my ruffle, ſhrunk from my happy hand, with amazing force and agility, as with my other arm I would have incircled her waiſt. 

Indeed you are!—The worſt of villains!—Help! dear bleſſed people! and ſcream'd—No help for a poor creature!— 

AmI then a villain, Madam?—AmI then a villain, ſay you?—and claſped both my arms about her, offering to raiſe her to my bounding heart.— 

O no!—And yet you are!—And again I was herdearLovelace!—Her hands again claſped over her charming boſom:—Kill me! Kill me!—If I am odious enough in your eyes, to deſerve this treatment; and I will thank you!—Too long, muchtoo long, has my life been a burden to me!—O•, wildly looking all around her, give me but the means, and I will inſtantly convince you, that my honour is dearer to me than my life! 

Then, with ſtill folded hands, and freſh-ſtreaming eyes, I was herbleſſedLovelace; and ſhe would thank me with her lateſt breath, if I would permit her to make that preference, or free her from farther indignities. 

I ſat ſuſpended for a moment: By my ſoul, thought I, thou art, upon full proof, an angel and no woman! Still, however, cloſe claſping her to my boſom, as I had raiſed her from her knees, ſhe again ſlid through my arms, and dropt upon them:—'See, Mr. Lovelace!—Good God! that I ſhould live to ſee this hour, and to bear this treatment!—See, at your feet, a poor creature, imploring your pity, who, for your ſake, is abandon'd of all the world! Let not my father's curſe thus dreadfully operate! Be notyouthe inflicter, who have been thecauſeof it! But ſpare me! I beſeech you ſpare me!—For how have I deſerved this treatment from you?—For your own ſake, if not for my ſake, and as you would that God Almighty, in your laſt hour, ſhould have mercy upon you, ſpare me!'— 

What heart but muſt have been penetrated? 

I would again have raiſed the dear ſuppliant from her knees; but ſhe would not be raiſed, till my ſoftened mind, ſhe ſaid, had yielded to her prayer, and bid her riſe to be innocent. 

Riſe then, my angel, riſe, and be what you are, and all you wiſh to be! Only pronounce me pardon'd for what has paſſed, and tell me, you will continue to look upon me with that eye of favour and ſerenity, which I have been bleſſed with for ſome days paſt, and I will ſubmit to my beloved conquer•ſs, whoſe power never was at ſo great an height with me, as now; and retire to my apartment. 

God Almighty, ſaid ſhe, hear your prayers in your moſt arduous moments, as you have heard mine! And now leave me, this moment leave me, to my own recollection: Inthatyou will leave me to miſery enough, and more than you ought to wiſh to your bittereſt enemy. 

Impute not every thing, my beſt Beloved, to deſign; for deſign it was not— 

O Mr. Lovelace!— 

Upon my ſoul, Madam, the fire was real—(And ſo it was, Jack!)—The houſe might have been conſumed by it, as you will be convinced in the morning by ocular demonſtration. 

O Mr. Lovelace!— 

Let my paſſion for you, Madam, and the unexpected meeting of you at your chamber-door, in an attitude ſo charming— 

Leave me, leave me, this moment!—I beſeech you, leave me; looking wildly, and in confuſion, now about her, and now upon herſelf. 

Excuſe me, deareſt creature, for thoſe liberties, which, innocent as they were, your too great delicacy may make you take amiſs. 

No more! No more!—Leave me, I beſeech you! Again looking upon herſelf, and around her, in a ſweet confuſion.—Begone! Begone!—Then weeping, ſhe ſtruggled vehemently to withdraw her hands, which all the while I held between mine.—Her ſtruggles! O what additional charms, as I now reflect, did her ſtruggles give to every feature, every limb, of a perſon ſo ſweetly elegant and lovely! 

Impoſſible! my deareſt life, till you pronounce my pardon!—Say but you forgive me!—Say you do! 

I beſeech you, begone! Leave me to myſelf, that I may think what Icando, and what Ioughtto do. 

That, my deareſt creature, is not enough. You muſt tell me, that I am forgiven; that you will ſee me to-morrow, as if nothing had happened. 

And then, claſping her again in my arms, hoping ſhe would not forgive me— 

I will—I do forgive you—Wretch that you are! 

Nay, my Clariſſa! And is it ſuch a reluctant pardon, mingled with a word ſo upbraiding, that I am to be put off with, when you are thus (claſping her cloſe to me) in my power? 

I do, Idoforgive you! 

Heartily? 

Yes, heartily! 

And freely? 

Freely! 

And will you look upon me to-morrow, as if nothing had paſſed? 

Yes, yes! 

I cannot take theſe peeviſh affirmatives, ſo much like intentional negatives!—Say you will, upon your honour! 

Upon my honour, then—O now, begone! begone! and never— 

What, never, my angel!—Is this forgiveneſs? 

Never, ſaid ſhe, let what has paſſed be remembered more! 

I inſiſted upon one kiſs to ſeal my pardon—And retired like a fool, a woman's fool, as I was!—I ſneakingly retired!—Couldſt thou have believed it? 

But I had no ſooner enter'd my own apartment, than, reflecting upon the opportunity I had loſt, and that all I had gained was but an increaſe of my own difficulties; and upon the ridicule I ſhould meet with below, upon a weakneſs ſo much out of my uſual character; I repented, and haſten'd back, in hope, that through the diſtreſs of mind which I left her in, ſhe had not ſo ſoon faſtened her door; and I was ſully reſolved to execute all my purpoſes, be the conſequence what it would; for, thought I, I have already ſinned beyondcordialforgiveneſs, I doubt; and if fitsand deſperation enſue, I can but marry at laſt, and then I ſhall make her amends. 

But I was juſtly puniſh'd;—for her door was faſt: And hearing her ſigh and ſob, as if her heart would burſt, My beloved creature, ſaid I, rapping gently, and her ſobbings ceaſing, I want but to ſay three words to you, which muſt be the moſt acceptable you ever heard from me. Let me ſee you but for one moment. 

I thought I heard her coming to open the door, and my heart leapt in that hope; but it was only to draw another bolt, to make it ſtill the faſter, and ſhe either could not, or would not, anſwer me, but retired to the further end of her apartment, to her cloſet, probably: And more like a fool than before, again I ſneaked away. 

This was my mine, my plot!—And this was all I made of it! 

I love her more than ever!—And well I may!—Never ſaw I ſuch poliſhed ivory as her arms and ſhoulders ſeemed to be; never touched I velvet ſo ſoft as her ſkin: Then ſuch an elegance! O Belford, ſhe is all perfection! Her pretty foot, in her ſtruggling, loſing her ſhoe, but juſt ſlipped on, as I told thee, equally white and delicate as the hand of any other lady, or even as her own hand! 

But ſeeſt thou not, that I have a claim of merit for a grace that every-body hitherto had denied me? And that is, for a capacity of being moved by prayers and tears: Where, where, on this occaſion, was thecallus,where the flint, that my heart was ſaid to be ſurrounded by? 

This, indeed, is the firſt inſtance, in the like caſe, that ever I was wrought upon. But why? Becauſe I never before encountered a reſiſtance ſo much in ear neſt: A reſiſtance, in ſhort, ſo irreſiſtible. 

What a triumph has her ſex obtained in my thoughts by this trial, and this reſiſtance! 

But if ſhe cannowforgive me—Can!—Shemuſt▪Has ſhe not upon her honour already done it?—But how will the dear creature keep that part of her promiſe, which engages her to ſee me in the morning, as if nothing had happened? 

She would give the world, I fancy, to have the firſt interview over!—She had not beſt reproach me:—Yetnotto reproach me!—What a charming puzzle! Let her break her word with me at her peril. Fly me ſhe cannot: No appeals lie from my tribunal.—What friend has ſhe in the world, if my compaſſion exert not itſelf in her favour?—And then the worthy Captain Tomlinſon, and her Uncle Harlowe, will be able to make all up for me, be my next offence what it will. 

As to thy apprehenſions of her committing any raſhneſs upon herſelf, whatever ſhe might have done in her paſſion, if ſhe could have ſeized upon her ſciſſars, or found any other weapon, I dare ſay, there is no fear of that from herdeliberatemind. A man has trouble enough with theſe truly pious, and truly virtuous girls [Now I believe there are ſuch]; he had need to have ſome benefitfrom,ſome ſecurityin,the rectitude of their minds. 

In ſhort, I fear nothing in this lady but grief; yet that's a ſlow worker, you know; and gives time to pop in a little joy between its ſullen fits. 

LETTER LI. Mr.LOVELACE,ToJOHN BELFORD,Eſq
Thurſday morning, Eight o'clock.HER chamber-door has not yet been opened. I muſt not expect ſhe will breakfaſt with me: Nor dine with me, I doubt. A little ſilly ſoul, what troubles does ſhe make to herſelf by her over-niceneſs!—All I have done to her, would have been looked upon as a frolick only, a romping-bout, and laughedoff by nine parts in ten of the ſex accordingly. The more ſhe makes of it, the more painful to herſelf, as well as to me. 

Why now, Jack, were it not better, uponher ownnotions, that ſhe ſeemed not ſo ſenſible, as ſhe will make herſelf to be, if ſhe is very angry? 

But perhaps I am more afraid than I need. I believe I am. From herover-niceneſs ariſes my fear, more than from any extraordinary reaſon for reſentment. Next time, ſhe may count herſelf very happy, if ſhe come off no worſe. 

The dear creature was ſo frighten'd, and ſo fatigued laſt night, no wonder ſhe lies it out this morning. 

I hope ſhe has had more reſt than I have had: Soft and balmy, I hope, have been her ſlumbers, that ſhe may meet me in tolerable temper. All ſweetly bluſhing and confounded—Iknowhow ſhe will look!—But why ſhould ſhe, theſufferer,be aſhamed, when I, thetreſpaſſer,am not? 

But cuſtom is a prodigious thing. The ladies are told how much their bluſhes heighten their graces: They practiſe for them therefore: Bluſhes come as readily when they call them, as their tears: Ay, that's it! While we men, taking bluſhes for a ſign of guilt or ſheepiſhneſs, are equally ſtudious to ſuppreſs them. 

BY my troth, Jack, I am half as much aſhamed to ſee the women below, as my fair one can be to ſee me. I have not yet open'd my door, that I may not be obtruded upon by them. 

After all, what devils may one make of the Sex! To what a height of—What ſhall I call it?—muſt thoſe of it be arrived, who once loved a man with ſo much diſtinction, as both Polly and S•lly loved me, and yet can have got ſo much above the pangs of jealouſy, ſo much above the mortifying reflections that ariſe from dividing and ſharing with new objects, the affectionsof him they prefer to all others, as to wiſh for, an•promote a competitorſhip in his love, and make their ſupreme delight conſiſt in reducing others to their level!—For thou canſt not imagine, how even Sally Martin rejoiced laſt night in the thought that the lady's hour was approaching. 

Paſt Ten o'clock.I NEVER long'd in my life for any thing with ſo much impatience, as to ſee my charmer. She has been ſtirring, it ſeems, theſe two hours. 

Dorcas juſt now tapp'd at her door, to take her morning commands. 

She had none for her,was the anſwer. 

She deſired to know, If ſhe would not breakfaſt? 

A ſullen and low-voicednegativeſhe received. 

I will go myſelf. 

THREE different times tapp'd I at the door, but had no anſwer. 

Permit me, deareſt creature, to inquire after your health. As you have not been ſeen to-day, I am impatient to know how you do. 

Not a word of anſwer; but a deep ſigh, even to ſobbing. 

Let me beg of you, Madam, to accompany me up another pair of ſtairs—You'll rejoice to ſee what a happy eſcape we have all had. 

A happy eſcape indeed, Jack!—For the fire had ſcorched the window-board, findged the hangings, and burnt through the ſlit-deal lining of the window-jambs. 

No anſwer, Madam!—Am I not worthy of one word?—Is it thus you keep your promiſe with me?—Shall I not have the favour of your company for two minutes, only for two minutes, in the dining-room? 

Hem!—And a deep ſigh!—was all the anſwer. 

Anſwer me, but how you do! Anſwer me but that you are well!—Is this the forgiveneſs that was the condition of my obedience? 

Then, in a faintiſh but angry voice, Begone from my door!—Wretch, inhuman, barbarous, and all that's baſe and treacherous!—Begone from my door! Nor teaze thus a poor creature, intitled to protection, not outrage. 

Well, Madam, I ſee how you keep your word with me!—Ifa ſudden impulſe, the effects of an unthought-of accident, cannot be forgiven— 

O the dreadful weight of a father's curſe, thus in the letter of it, ſo likely to be fulfilled! 

And then her voice dying away into inarticulate murmurs, I looked through the key-hole, and ſaw her on her knees, her face, tho' not towards me, lifted up, as well as hands, and theſe folded, deprecating, I•uppoſe, that gloomy tyrant's curſe. 

I could not help being moved. 

My deareſt life! admit me to your preſence, but for two minutes, and confirm your promiſed pardon; and may lightning blaſt me on the ſpot, if I offer any thing but my penitence, at a ſhrine ſo ſacred!—I will afterwards leave you for the whole day; and till to-morrow morning; then to attend, with writings, all ready to ſign, a licence obtained, or, if it cannot, a miniſter without one. This once believe me. When you ſee the reality of the danger, that gave occaſion for this your unhappy reſentment, you will think leſs hardly of me. And let me beſeech you to perform a promiſe, on which I made a reliance not altogether ungenerous. 

I cannot ſee you! Would to heaven I never had! If I write, that's all I can do. 

Let your writing then, my deareſt life, confirm your promiſe. And I will withdraw in expectation of it. 

Paſt Eleven o'clock.JUST now ſhe rung her bell for Dorcas; and, with her door in her hand, only half-open'd, gave her a billet for me. 

How did the dear creature look, Dorcas? 

She was dreſſed. Turned her face quite from me. Sigh'd, as if her heart would break. 

Sweet creature!—I kiſſed the wet wafer, and drew it from the paper with my breath. 

Theſe are the contents.—No inſcriptive Sir! No Mr. Lovelace! 

I Cannot ſee you: Nor will I, if I can help it. Words cannot expreſs the anguiſh of my ſoul on your baſeneſs and ingratitude. 

If the circumſtances of things are ſuch, that I can have no way for reconciliation with thoſe who would have been my natural protectors from ſuch outrages, but throughyou(the only inducement I can have to ſtay a moment longer in your knowlege), pen and ink muſt be, at preſent, the only means of communication between us. 

Vileſt of men! and moſt deteſtable of plotters! how have I deſerved from you the ſhocking indignities—But no more—Only for your own ſake, wiſh not, at leaſt for a week to come, to ſee 

The undeſervedly injured and inſulted,CLARISSA HARLOWE.So thou ſeeſt, nothing could have ſtood me in ſtead, but this plot of Tomlinſon and her Uncle: To what a pretty paſs, nevertheleſs, have I brought myſelf!—Had Caeſar been ſuch a fool, he had never paſſed the Rubicon. But, after hehadpaſſed it, had he retreated,re infectâ,intimidated by a ſenatorial edict, what a pretty figure would he have made in hiſtory!—I might have known, that to attempt a robbery, and put a perſon in bodily fear, is as puniſhable as if the robbery had been actually committed. 

But not to ſee her for a week!—Dear pretty ſoul! how ſhe anticipates me in every thing! The counſellor will have finiſhed the writings, ready to ſign, to-day, or to-morrow, at furtheſt: The licence with the parſon, or the parſon without the licence, muſt be alſo procured within the next four-and-twenty hours: Pritchard is as good as ready with his indentures tripartite: Tomlinſon is at hand, with a favourable anſwer from her Uncle—Yet not to ſee her for a week!—Dear ſweet ſoul!—Her good angel is gone a journey: Is truanting at leaſt. But nevertheleſs, in thy week's time, and much leſs, my charmer, I doubt not to have completed my triumph! 

But what vexes me of all things, is, that ſuch an excellent creature ſhould break her word.—Fie, fie, upon her!—But nobody is abſolutely perfect!'Tis human to err,butnot to perſevere—I hope my charmer cannot be inhuman! 

LETTER LII. Mr.LOVELACE,ToJOHN BELFORD,Eſq
King's-Arms, Pallmall,Thurſday Two o'clock.SEveral billets paſſed between us before I went out, by the internuncioſhip of Dorcas: For which reaſon mine are ſuperſcribed by her married name.—She would not open her door to receive them; leſt I ſhould be near it, I ſuppoſe: So Dorcas was forced to put them under the door (after copying them for thee); and thence to take the anſwer. Read them, if thou wilt, at this place. 

To Mrs.LOVELACE.
INdeed, my deareſt life, you carry this matter too far. What will the people below, who ſuppoſe us one, as to the ceremony, think of ſo great a niceneſs? Liberties ſo innocent; the occaſion ſo accidental!—You will expoſeyourſelfas well asme.—Hitherto they know nothing of what has paſſed. Andwhat, indeed,haspaſſed, to occaſion all this reſentment?—I am ſure, you will not, by a breach of your word of honour, give me reaſon to conclude, that, had Inotobeyed you, I could have fared no worſe. 

Moſt ſincerely do I repent the offence given to your delicacy—But muſt I, for ſo accidental an occurrence, be branded by ſuch ſhocking names?Vileſt of men,andmoſt deteſtable of plotters,are hard words!—From ſuch a Lady's pen too. 

If you ſtep up another pair of ſtairs, you'll be convinced, that, howeverdeteſtableto you, I am noplotterin this affair. 

I muſt inſiſt upon ſeeing you, in order to take your directions upon ſome of the ſubjects that we talked of yeſterday in the evening. 

All that's more than neceſſary is too much. I claim your promiſed pardon, and wiſh to plead it on my knees. 

I beg your preſence in the dining-room for one quarter of an hour, and I will then leave you for the day. I am, my deareſt life, 

Your ever-adoring and truly penitent,LOVELACE.To Mr.LOVELACE.
I Will not ſee you. I cannot ſee you. I have no directions to give you. Let Providence decide for me as it pleaſes. 

The more I reflect upon your vileneſs, your ingraful, your barbarous vileneſs, the more I am exaſperated againſt you. 

You are thelaſtperſon, whoſe judgment I would take upon what is or is not carried too far, in matters of decency. 

'Tis grievous to me to write, or even to think of you at preſent. Urge me no more then. Once more, I willnotſee you. Nor care I, now you have made me vile to myſelf, what other people think of me. 

To Mrs.LOVELACE.
AGain, Madam, I remind you of your promiſe: And beg leave to ſay, I inſiſt upon the performance of it. 

Remember, deareſt creature, that the fault of a blameable perſon cannot warrant a fault in one more perfect. Over niceneſs may be under-niceneſs! 

I cannot reproach myſelf with any thing that deſerves this high reſentment. 

I own that the violence of my paſſion for you might have carried me beyond fit bounds:—But that your commands and adjurations had ſuch a power over me, at ſuch a moment, I humbly preſume to ſay, deſerves ſome conſideration. 

You injoin me not to ſee you for a week. If I have not your pardon before Captain Tomlinſon comes to town, what ſhall I ſay tohim? 

I beg once more your preſence in the dining-room. By my ſoul, Madam, Imuſtſee you. 

I want to conſult you about the licence, and other particulars of great importance. The people below think us married; and I cannot talk to you, the door between us, upon ſuch ſubjects. 

For heaven's ſake, favour me with your preſence for a few minutes: And I will leave you for the day. 

If I am to be forgiven, according to your promiſe, the earlieſt forgiveneſs muſt be the leaſt painful to yourſelf, as well as to 

Your truly contrite and afflicted,LOVELACE.To Mr.LOVELACE.
THE more you teaze me, the worſe will it be for you. 

Timeis wanted to conſider whether I ever ſhould think of you at all. At preſent, it is my ſincere wiſh, that I may never more ſee your face. 

All that can afford you the leaſt ſhadow of favour from me, ariſes from the hoped-for reconciliation with myreal,not myJudas-protector. 

I am careleſs at preſent of conſequences. I hate myſelf: And who is it I have reaſon to value?—Not the man who could form a plot to diſgrace his own hopes, as well as a poor friendleſs creature (made friendleſs by himſelf), by outrages not to be thought of with patience. 

To Mrs.LOVELACE.
Madam,I Will go to the Commons, and proceed in every particular, as if I had not the misfortune to be under your diſpleaſure. 

I muſt inſiſt upon it, that however faulty my paſſion, on ſo unexpected an incident, made me appear to a lady of your delicacy, yet my compliance with your intreaties at ſuch a moment, as it gave you an inſtance of your power over me, which few men could have ſhewn; ought, duly conſider'd, to intitle me to the effects of that ſolemn promiſe which was the condition of my obedience. 

I hope to find you in a kinder, and, I will ſay,juſterdiſpoſition on my return. Whether I get the licence, or not, let me beg of you to make theSoonyou have been pleaſed to bid me hope for, to-morrow morning. This will reconcile every thing, and make me the happieſt of men. 

The ſettlements are ready to ſign, or will be by night. 

For heaven's ſake, Madam, do not carry your reſentment into a diſpleaſure ſo diſproportionate to the offence. For that would be to expoſe us both to the people below; and, what is of infinite more conſequence to us, to Captain Tomlinſon. Let us be able, I beſeech you, Madam, to aſſure him, on his next viſit, that we are one. 

As I have no hope to be permitted to dine with you, I ſhall not return till evening: And then, I preſume to ſay, Iexpect(yourpromiſeauthorizes me to uſe the word) to find you diſpoſed to bleſs, by your conſent for to-morrow, 

Your adoringLOVELACE.WHAT pleaſure did I propoſe to take, how toenjoythe ſweet confuſion I expected to find her in, while all was ſo recent!—But ſhemuſt,ſheſhallſee me on my return. It were better forherſelf,as well as forme,that ſhe had not madeſo much ado about nothing.I muſt keep my anger alive, leſt it ſink into compaſſion.LoveandCompaſſion,be the provocation ever ſo great, are hard to be ſeparated: WhileAngerconverts what would bePitywithout it, intoReſentment.Nothing can be lovely in a man's eye, with which he is thoroughly diſpleaſed. 

I ordered Dorcas, on putting the laſt billet under the door, and finding it taken up, to tell her, that I hoped an anſwer to it before I went out. 

Her reply was verbal,Tell him that I care not whither he goes, nor what he does.—And this,re-urged by Dorcas,was all ſhe had to ſay to me. 

I looked thro' her keyhole at my going by her door, and ſaw her on her knees, at her bed's feet, her head and boſom on the bed, her arms extended [ſweet creature!], and in an agony ſhe ſeemed to be, ſobbing, as I heard at that diſtance, as if her heart would break.—By my ſoul, Jack, I am apityful fellow. Recollection is my enemy!—Divine excellence!—Happy for ſo many days together!—Now ſo unhappy!—And for what?—But ſhe is purity itſelf.—And why, after all, ſhould I thus torment—But I muſt not truſt myſelf with myſelf, in the humour I am in. 

WAITING here for Mowbray and Mallory, by whoſe aid I am to get the licence, I took papers out o•my pocket, to divert myſelf; and thy laſt popt itſelf officiouſly the firſt into my hand. I gave it the honour of a re-peruſal; and this revived the ſubject with me, which I had reſolved not to truſt myſelf with. 

I remember, that the dear creature, in her torn anſwer to my propoſals, ſays,That condeſcenſion is not meanneſs.She better knows how to make this out, than any mortal breathing. Condeſcenſion, indeed,impliesdignity: And dignity everwasthere inhercondeſcenſion. Yet ſuch a dignity, as gave grace to the condeſcenſion; for there was no pride, no inſult, no apparent ſuperiority, indicated by it.—This Miſs Howe confirms to be a part of her general characterPage23.of this Volume.. 

I can tell her, how ſhe might behave, to make me her own for ever. She knows ſhe cannot fly me. She knows ſhe muſt ſee me ſooner or later; the ſooner the more gracious.—I would allow her to reſent (not becauſe the liberties I took with her require reſentment, were ſhe not a CLARISSA; but as it becomes her particular niceneſs to reſent): But would ſhe ſhew moreLovethanAbhorrenceof me in her reſentment; would ſheſeem,if it werebuttoſeem,to believe the fire no device, and all that followed merely accidental; and deſcend, upon it, to tender expoſtulation and upbraiding for the advantage I would have taken of her ſurprize; and would ſhe, at laſt, be ſatisfied (aswellſhe may), that it was attended with no further conſequence; and place ſome generous confidence in my honour [Power loves to be truſted, Jack]; I think I would put an end to all her trials, and pay her my vows at the altar. 

Yet, to have taken ſuch bold ſteps, as with Tomlinſon and her Uncle—To have made ſuch a progreſs—O Belford, Belford, how have I puzzled myſelf, aswell as her!—This curſed averſion to wedlock how has it intangled me!—What contradictions has it not made me guilty of! 

How pleaſing to myſelf, to look back upon the happy days I gave her; though mine would doubtleſs have been more unmixedly ſo, could I have determined to lay aſide my contrivances, and to be as ſincere all the time, as ſhe deſerved that I ſhould be! 

I〈◊〉find this humour hold but till to-morrow mor•ing [And it has now laſted two full hours, and I ſ•〈◊〉•nks, to havepleaſurein encouraging it],••th make thee a viſit, I think, or get thee to come to me; and then will I conſult thee upon it. 

But ſhe will not truſt me. She will not confide in my honour. Doubt, in this caſe, is defiance. She loves me not well enough, to forgive me generouſly. She is ſo greatly above me! How can I forgive her for a merit ſo mortifying to my pride! Shethinks,ſheknows,ſhe hastoldme, that ſhe is above me. Theſe words are ſtill in my ears,'Begone, Lovelace!—My ſoul is above thee, man!—Thou haſt a proud heart to contend with!—My ſoul is above thee, manSee page148.of this Volume.!'Miſs Howe thinks her above me too. Thou, even thou, my friend, myintimatefriend and companion, art of the ſame opinion. I fear her as much as I love her.—How ſhall my pride bear theſe reflections?—My wife, (as I have ſo often ſaid, becauſe it ſo often recurs to my thoughts) to be ſomuchmy ſuperior!—Myſelf to be conſidered but as the ſecond perſon in my own family!—Canſt thou teach me to bear ſuch a reflection as this!—To tell me of my acquiſition in her, and that ſhe, with all her excellencies, will beminein full property, is a miſtake—It cannot be ſo—For ſhall I not behers; and notmy own?—Will not every act of her duty (as I cannot deſerve it) be a condeſcenſion, and a triumph over me?—And muſt I owe it merely to hergoodneſs,that ſhe does not deſpiſeme?—To have her condeſcend to bear with my follies!—To wound me with an eye of pity!—A daughter of the Harlowes thus to excel the laſt, and, as I have heretofore ſaid, not the meaneſt of the Lovelaces—Forbid it!— 

Yet forbid it not—For do I not now—do I not every moment—ſee her before me all over charms, and elegance, and purity, as in the ſtruggles of the paſt midnight? And in theſe ſtruggles, heart, voice, eyes, hands, and ſentiments, ſo greatly, ſo gloriouſly conſiſtent with the character ſhe has ſuſtained from her cradle to the preſent hour? 

But what advantages do I give thee? 

Yet have I not always done her juſtice? Why then thy teazing impertinence? 

However, I forgive thee, Jack—Since (ſo much generous love am I capable of!), I had rather all the world ſhould condemnme,than thathercharacter ſhould ſuffer the leaſt impeachment. 

The dear creature herſelf once told me, that there was a ſtrange mixture in my mindVol.III.p.169.. 

I have been calledDevil,andBeelzebub,between the two proud beauties: I muſt indeed be a Beelzebub, if I had not ſome tolerable qualities. 

But as Miſs Howe ſays, herſuffering-timeis herſhining-timeVol.IV.p.24.. Hitherto ſhe has done nothing but ſhine. 

She called mevillain,Belford, within theſe few hours. And what is the ſum of the preſent argument; but that had Inotbeen a villain in her ſenſe of the word, ſhe had not been ſo much anangel? 

O Jack, Jack! This midnight attempt has made me mad; has utterly undone me! How can the dear creature ſay, I have made her vile in herowneyes, when her behaviour under ſuch a ſurprize, and her reſentment under ſuch circumſtances, have ſo greatly exalted her inmine? 

Whence, however, this ſtrange rhapſody?—Is it owing to my beinghere?That I am not atSinclair's? But if there be infection in that houſe, how has my Beloved eſcaped it? 

But no more in this ſtrain!—I will ſee what her behaviour will be on my return—Yet already do I begin to apprehend ſome little ſinkings, ſome little retrogradations; for I have juſt now a doubt ariſen, whether, forher ownſake, I ſhould wiſh her to forgive melightly,or withdifficulty? 

I AM in away to come at the wiſh'd-for licence. 

I have now given every-thing between my Beloved and me a full conſideration; and my puzzle is over. What has brought me to a ſpeedier determination, is, that I think I have found out what ſhe means by theweek's diſtance ſhe intends to hold me at: It is, that ſhe may have time to write to Miſs Howe, to put in motion that curſed ſcheme of hers, and to take meaſures upon it, which ſhall enable her to abandon and renounce me for ever.—Now, Jack, if I obtain not admiſſion to her preſence on my return; but am refuſed with haughtineſs; if herweekbe inſiſted upon (ſuch proſpects before her); I ſhall be confirmed in my conjecture; and it will be plain to me, that weak at beſt was that Love, which could give place to punctilio, at a time that the all-reconciling ceremony (ſo ſhe muſt think) waits her command:—Then will I recollect all her perverſeneſſes; then will I re-peruſe Miſs Howe's letters, and the tranſcripts from others of them; and give way to my averſion to the life of ſhackles: And then ſhall ſhe be mine in my own way. 

But, after all, I am in hopes, that ſhe will have better conſidered of every-thing by the evening. That her threat of aweek's diſtance was thrown out in the heat of paſſion; and that ſhe will allow, that I have as much cauſe to quarrel with her for breach of her word, as ſhe has with me for breach of the peace. 

Theſe lines of Rowe have got into my head; and I ſhall repeat them very devoutly all the way the chairmen ſhall poppet me towards her by-and-by. 

Teach me, ſome power, the happy art of ſpeech,To dreſs my purpoſe up in gracious words;Such as may ſoftly ſteal upon her ſoul,And never waken the tempeſtuous paſſions.LETTER LIII. Mr.LOVELACE,ToJOHN BELFORD,Eſq
Thurſday Evening, June8.O For a curſe to kill with!—Ruin'd! Undone! Outwitted, trick'd!—Zounds, man, the lady is gone off!—Abſolutely gone off!—Eſcaped!— 

Thou knoweſt not, nor canſt conceive, the pangs that wring my heart!—What can I do!—O Lord, O Lord, O Lord! 

And thou, too, who haſt endeavoured to weaken my hands, wilt but clap thy dragon's wings at the tidings!— 

Yet I muſt write, or I ſhall go diſtracted. Little leſs have I been theſe two hours; diſpatching meſſengers to every ſtage; to every inn; to every waggon or coach, whether flying or creeping, and to every houſe with a bill up, for five miles round. 

The little hypocrite, who knows not a ſoul in this town [I thought I was ſure of her at any time], ſuch an unexperienced traitreſs; giving me hope too, in her firſt billet, that her expectation of the family-reconciliation would with-hold her from taking ſuch a ſtep as this—Curſe upon her contrivances!—I thought, that it was owing to her baſhfulneſs, to her modeſty, that, after a few innocent freedoms, ſhe could not look me in the face; when, all the while, ſhe was impudently [yes, I ſayimpudently,though ſhe be Clariſſa Harlowe]; contriving to rob me of the deareſtproperty I had ever purchaſed—Purchaſed by a painful ſervitude of many months; fighting through the wild beaſts of her family for her, and combating with a wind-mill virtue, that hath coſt me millions of perjuries only to attempt; and which now, with its damn'd air-fans, has toſt me a mile and a half beyond hope!—And this, juſt as I had arrived within view of the conſummation of all my wiſhes! 

O Devil of Love! God of Love no more!—How have I deſerved this of thee!—Never before the friend of frozen virtue!—Powerleſsdaemon, for powerleſs thou muſt be, if thou meanedſt not to play me booty; who ſhall henceforth kneel at thy altars!—May every enterprizing heart abhor, deſpiſe, execrate, renounce thee, as I do.—But what ſignifies curſing now! 

How ſhe could effect this her wicked eſcape, is my aſtoniſhment; the whole ſiſterhood having charge of her:—For, as yet, I have not had patience enough to inquire into the particulars, nor to let a ſoul of them approach me. 

Of this I am ſure,or I had not brought her hither,There is not a creature belonging to this houſe, that could be corrupted either by virtue or remorſe: The higheſt joy every infernal nymph of this worſe than infernal habitation,couldhave known, would have been to reduce this proud Beauty to her own level.—And as to my villain, who alſo had charge of her, he is ſuch a ſeaſon'd varlet, that he delights in miſchief for the ſake of it: No bribe could ſeduce him to betray his truſt, were there but wickedneſs in it!—'Tis well, however, he was out of my way, when the curſed news was imparted to me!—Gone, the villain! in queſt of her: Not to return, nor to ſee my•ace (ſo it ſeems he declared), till he has heard ſome tidings of her; and all the out-of-place varlets of his numerous acquaintance, are ſummoned and employed in the ſame buſineſs. 

To what purpoſe brought I this angel [angel I muſt yet call her!] to this helliſh houſe?—And was I not meditating to do her deſerved honour? By my ſoul, Belford, I was reſolved—But thou knoweſt what I hadconditionallyreſolved—And now, tho' I was determined ſo much in her favour, who can tell what hands ſhe may have fallen into? 

I am mad, ſtark mad, by Jupiter, at the thoughts of this!—Unprovided, deſtitute, unacquainted—ſome villain, worſe than myſelf, who adores her not as I adore her, may have ſeized her, and taken advantage of her diſtreſs!—Let me periſh, Belford, if a whole hecatomb ofinnocents,as the little plagues are called, ſhall atone for the broken promiſe and wicked artifices of this cruel creature. 

COMING home with reſolutions ſo favourable to her, judge thou of my diſtraction, when her eſcape was firſt hinted to me, although but in broken ſentences. I knew not what I ſaid, nor what I did; I wanted to kill ſomebody. I flew out of one room into another, while all avoided me but the veteran Betty Carberry, who broke the matter to me: I charged bribery and corruption, in my firſt fury, upon all; and threatened deſtruction to old and young, as they ſhould come in my way. 

Dorcas continueslockedup from me: Sally and Polly have not yet dared to appear: The vile Sinclair— 

But here comes the odious devil: She taps at the door, though that's only a-jar, whining and ſnuffling, to try, I ſuppoſe, to coax me into temper. 

WHAT a helpleſs ſtate, where a man can only execrate himſelf and others; the occaſion of his rage remaining; the evil increaſing upon reflection; time itſelf conſpiring to deepen it!—O how I curſed her! 

I have her now, methinks, before me blubbering—How odious does ſorrow make an ugly face!—Thine, Jack, and this old beldam's, in penitentials, inſtead of moving compaſſion, muſt evermore confirm hatred; while Beauty in tears, is beauty heighten'd, and what my heart has ever delighted to ſee.— 

What excuſe!—Confound you, and your curſed daughters, what excuſe can you make! Is ſhe not gone!—Has ſhe not eſcaped!—But before I am quite diſtracted! before I commit half a hundred murders, let me hear how it was. 

I HAVE heard her ſtory!—Art, damn'd, confounded, wicked, unpardonable Art, in a woman of her character—But ſhew me a woman, and I'll ſhew thee a plotter!—This plaguy ſex isArtitſelf: Every individual of it is a plotter by nature. 

This is the ſubſtance of the old wretch's account. 

She told me,'That I had no ſooner left the vile houſe, than Dorcas acquainted the Syren'[Do, Jack, let me call her names!—I beſeech thee, Jack, let me call her names!]'than Dorcas acquainted her lady with it; and that I had left word, that I was gone to Doctors-Commons, and ſhould be heard of for ſome hours at the Horn there, if inquired after by the counſellor, or any-body elſe: That afterwards I ſhould be either at the Cocoa-Tree, or King's-Arms; and ſhould not return till late. She then urged her to take ſome refreſhment.' 

'She was in tears, when Dorcas approached her; her ſaucy eyes ſwelled with weeping: She refuſed either to eat or drink; ſighed as if her heart would break.'Falſe, deviliſh grief! not the humble, ſilent grief, that only deſerves pity!—Contriving to ruin me, to deſpoil me of all that I held valuable, in the very midſt of it! 

'Nevertheleſs, being reſolved not to ſee me for a week at leaſt, ſhe ordered her to bring her up three or four French rolls, with a little butter, and a decanterof water; telling her, ſhe would diſpenſe with her attendance; and that ſhould be all ſhe would live upon in the interim. So, artful creature! pretending to lay up for a week's ſiege.'—For, as to ſubſtantial food, ſhe, no more than other angels—Angels, ſaid I!—The devil take me, if ſhe ſhall be any more an angel!—For ſhe is odious in my eyes; and I hate her mortally!— 

But oh! Lovelace, thou lyeſt!—She is all that is lovely! All that is excellent!— 

Butisſhe,canſhe, be gone!—O how Miſs Howe will triumph!—But if that little Fury receive her, Fate ſhall make me rich amends; for then will I contrive to have them both. 

I was looking back for connexion—but the devil take connexion; I have no buſineſs with it: The contrary beſt befits diſtraction, and that will ſoon be my lot! 

'Dorcas conſulted the old wretch about obeying her: O yes, by all means, for Mr. Lovelace knew how to come at her at any time; and directed a bottle of ſherry to be added. 

'This chearful compliance ſo obliged her, that ſhe was prevailed upon to go up, and look at the damage done by the fire; and ſeemed not only ſhocked at it, but ſatisfied it was no trick, as ſhe owned ſhe had at firſt apprehended it to be. All this made them ſecure; and they laughed in their ſleeves, to think what a childiſh way of ſhewing her reſentment, ſhe had found out; Sally throwing out her witticiſms, that Mrs. Lovelace was right, however,not to quarrel with her bread and butter.' 

Now this very childiſhneſs, astheythought it, in ſuch a genius, would have mademeſuſpect either her head, after what had happened the night before; or her intention, when the marriage was, ſo far as ſhe knew, to be completed within the week ſhe was reſolved to ſecrete herſelf from me in the ſame houſe. 

'She ſent Will. with a letter to Wilſon's, directed to Miſs Howe, ordering him to inquire if there were not one for her there. 

'He only pretended to go, and brought word there 'was none; and put her letter in his pocket for me. 

'She then order'd him to carry another (which ſhe gave him) to the Horn-Tavern to me.—All this done without any ſeeming hurry; yet ſhe appeared to be very ſolemn; and put her handkerchief frequently to her eyes. 

'Will. pretended to come to me, with this letter; but tho' the dog had the ſagacity to miſtruſt ſomething, on her ſending him out a ſecond time (and tome,whom ſhe had refuſed to ſee); which he thought extraordinary; and mentioned his miſtruſts to Sally, Polly, and Dorcas; yet they made light of his ſuſpicions; Dorcas aſſuring them all, that her Lady ſeemed more ſtupid with her grief, than active; and that ſhe really believed ſhe was a little turned in her head, and knew not what ſhe did.—But all of them depended upon her inexperience, her open temper, and upon her not making the leaſt motion towards going out, or to have a coach or chair called, as ſometimes ſhe had done; and ſtill more upon the preparations ſhe had made for a week's ſiege, as I may call it. 

'Will. went out, pretending to bring the letter to me; but quickly returned; his heart ſtill miſgiving him; on recollecting my frequent cautions, that he was not to judge for himſelf, when he hadpoſitiveorders; but if any doubt occurred, from circumſtances I could not foreſee, literally to follow them, as the only way to avoid blame. 

'But it muſt have been in this little interval, that ſhe eſcaped; for ſoon after his return, they made faſt the ſtreet-door and hatch, the mother and the two nymphs taking a little turn into the garden; Dorcasgoing up ſtairs, and Will. (to avoid being ſeen by his lady, or his voice heard) down into the kitchen. 

'About half an hour after, Dorcas, who had planted herſelf where ſhe could ſee her Lady's door open, had the curioſity to go to look through the key-hole, having a miſgiving, as ſhe ſaid, that her Lady might offer ſome violence to herſelf, in the mood ſhe had been in all day; and finding the key in the door, which was not very uſual, ſhe tapped at it three or four times, and having no anſwer, opened it, with Madam, Madam, did you call?—Suppoſing her in her cloſet. 

'Having no anſwer, ſhe ſtept forward, and was aſtoniſhed to find her not there: She haſtily ran into the dining-room, then into my apartments, ſearched every cloſet; dreading all the time to behold ſome ſad cataſtrophe. 

'Not finding her any-where, ſhe ran down to the old creature, and her nymphs, with a Have you ſeen my Lady?—Then ſhe's gone!—She's no-where above! 

'They were ſure ſhe could not be gone out. 

'The whole houſe was in an uproar in an inſtant; ſome running up ſtairs, ſome down, from the upper rooms to the lower; and all ſcreaming, How ſhould they look me in the face! 

'Will. cried out, he was a dead man!Heblamedthem; They, him; and every one was anaccuſer,and anexcuſerat the ſame time. 

'When they had ſearched the whole houſe, and every cloſet in it, ten times over, to no purpoſe: They took it into their heads to ſend to all the porters, chairmen, and hackney coachmen, that had been near the houſe for two hours paſt, to inquire if any of them ſaw Such a young Lady; deſcribing her. 

'This brought them ſome light: The only dawning for hope, that I can have, and which keeps mefrom abſolute deſpair. One of the chairmen gave them this account: That he ſaw ſuch a one come out of the houſe a little before four (in a great hurry, and as if frighted), with a little parcel tied up in a handkerchief, in her hand: That he took notice to his fellow, who plied her, without her anſwering, that ſhe was a fine young lady: That he'd warrant, ſhe had either a bad huſband, or very croſs parents; for that her eyes ſeemed ſwelled with crying. Upon which, a third fellow replied, That it might be a Doe eſcaped from MotherDamnable's park. This Mrs. Sinclair told me with a curſe, and a wiſh, that ſhe knew the ſaucy villain:—She thought, truly, that ſhe had a better reputation; ſo handſomely as ſhe lived, and ſo juſtly as ſhe paid every-body for what ſhe bought; her houſe viſited by the beſt and civilleſt of gentlemen; and no noiſe or brawls ever heard, or known in it! 

'From theſe appearances, the fellow who gave this information, had the curioſity to follow her, unperceived. She often looked back. Every-body who paſſed her, turned to look after her; paſſing their verdicts upon her tears, her hurry, and her charming perſon; till coming to a ſtand of coaches, a coachman plied her; was accepted; alighted, opened the coach-door in a hurry, ſeeingherhurry; and in it ſhe ſtumbled for haſte; and the fellow believed, hurt her ſhins with the ſtumble.' 

The devil take me, Belford, if my generous heart is not moved for her, notwithſtanding her wicked deceit, to think what muſt be her reflections and apprehenſions at the time!—A mind ſo delicate, heeding no cenſures; yet, probably, afraid of being laid hold of by a Lovelace in every-one ſhe ſaw! At the ſame time, not knowing to what dangers ſhe was going to expoſe herſelf; nor of whom ſhe could obtain ſhelter; a ſtranger to the town, and to all its ways; the afternoonfar gone; but little money; and no cloaths but thoſe ſhe had on. 

It is impoſſible, in this little interval ſince laſt night, that Miſs Howe's Townſend could be co-operating. 

But how ſhe muſt abhor me, to run all theſe riſques; how heartily muſt ſhe deteſt me, for my freedoms of laſt night! O that ſhe had had greater reaſon for a reſentment ſo violent!—As to herVirtue,I am too much enraged to give her the merit due to that: To Virtue it cannot be owing, that ſhe ſhould fly from the charming proſpects that were before her: But to Malice, Hatred, Contempt, Harlowe-Pride, the worſt of Pride, and to all the deadly paſſions that ever reigned in a female breaſt.—And if I can but recover her—But be ſtill, be calm, be huſhed, my ſtormy paſſions; for is it not Clariſſa (Harlowemuſt I ſay?), that thus I rave againſt? 

'The fellow heard her ſay, Drive faſt! Very faſt! Where, Madam?—To Holborn Bars, anſwered ſhe; repeating, Drive very faſt!—And up ſhe pulled both the windows: And he loſt ſight of the coach in a minute. 

'Will. as ſoon as he had this intelligence, ſpeeded away in hopes to trace her out; declaring, that he would never think of ſeeing me, till he had heard ſome tidings of his lady.' 

And now, Belford, all my hope is, that this fellow (who attended us in our airing to Hampſtead, to Highgate, to Muzzlehill, to Kentiſh-Town) will hear of her at ſome one or other of thoſe places.—And on this I the rather build, as I remember, ſhe was once, after our return, very inquiſitive about the ſtages, and their prices; praiſing the conveniency to paſſengers in their going off every hour; and this in Will's hearing, who was then in attendance. Woe be to the villain, if he recollect not this! 

I HAVE been traverſing her room, meditating, or taking up every-thing ſhe but touched or uſed: The glaſs ſhe dreſſed at, I was ready to break, for not giving me the perſonal image it was wont to reflect, ofher,whoſe idea is for ever preſent with me. I call for her, now in the tendereſt, now in the moſt reproachful terms, as if within hearing: Wantingher,I want my own ſoul, at leaſt every-thing dear to it. What a void in my heart! what a chilneſs in my blood, as if its circulation were arreſted! From her room to my own; in the dining-room, and in and out of every place where I have ſeen the beloved of my heart, do I hurry; in none can I tarry; her lovely image in everyone, in ſome lively attitude, ruſhing cruelly upon me, in differently remembered converſations. 

But when in my firſt fury, at my return, I went up two pair of ſtairs, reſolved to find the locked-up Dorcas, and beheld the vainly-burnt window-board, and recollected my baffled contrivances, baffled by my own weak folly, I thought my diſtraction completed, and down I ran as one frighted at a ſpectre, ready to howl for vexation; my head and my temples ſhooting with a violence I had never felt before; and my back aching as if the vertebrae were disjointed, and falling in pieces. 

But now that I have heard the mother's ſtory, and contemplated the dawning hopes given by the chairman's information, I am a good deal eaſier, and can make cooler reflections. Moſt heartily pray I for Will.'s ſucceſs, every four or five minutes. If I loſe her, all my rage will return with redoubled fury. The diſgrace to be thus outwitted by a novice, an infant, in ſtratagem and contrivance, added to the violence of my paſſion for her, will either break my heart, or (what ſaves many a heart in evils inſupportable) turn my brain. What had I to do to go out a licence-hunting, at leaſt till I had ſeen her, and made upmatters with her? And indeed, were it not the privilege of a principal to lay all his own faults upon his underlings, and never be to blame himſelf▪I ſhould be apt to reflect, that I am more in fault than anybody. And as the ſting of this reflection will ſharpen upon me if I recover her not, how ſhall I be able to bear it? 

If ever— 

Here Mr. Lovelace lays himſelf under a curſe, too ſhocking to be repeated, if he revenge not himſelf upon the Lady, ſhould be once more get her into his hands. 

 

I HAVE juſt now diſmiſſed the ſniveling toad Dorcas, who was introduced to me for my pardon by the whining mother. I gave her a kind of negative and ungracious forgiveneſs.—Yet I ſhall as violently curſe the two nymphs, by-and-by, for the conſequences of my own folly: And this will be a good way too, to prevent their ridicule upon me, for loſing ſo glorious an opportunity as I had laſt night, or rather this morning. 

I have collected, from the reſult of the inquiries made of the chairman, and from Dorcas's obſervations before the cruel creature eſcaped, a deſcription of her dreſs; and am reſolved, if I cannot otherwiſe hear of her, to advertiſe her in the Gazette, as an eloped wife, both by her maiden and acknowleged name; for her elopement will ſoon be known by everyEnemy,why then ſhould not myFriendsbe made acquainted with it, from whoſe inquiries and informations I may expect ſome tidings of her? 

She had on a brown luſtring night-gown, freſh, and looking like new, as every thing ſhe wears does, whether new or not, from an elegance natural to her. A beaver hat, a black ribband about her neck, and blue knots on her breaſt. A quilted petticoat of carnationcoloured ſatten; a roſe-diamond ring, ſuppoſed on her finger; and in her whole perſon and appearance, as I ſhall expreſs it, a dignity, as well as beauty, that commands the repeated attention of every-one who ſees her. 

The deſcription of her perſon, I ſhall take a little more pains about. My mind muſt be more at eaſe, before I can undertake that. And I ſhall threaten, that if, after a certain period given for her voluntary return, ſhe be not heard of, I will proſecute any perſon, who preſumes to entertain, harbour, abett, or encourage her, with all the vengeance that an injur'd gentleman and huſband may be warranted to take by Law, or otherwiſe. 

FRESH cauſe of aggravation!—But for this ſcribling vein, or I ſhould ſtill run mad! 

Again going into her chamber, becauſe it was hers, and ſighing over the bed, and every piece of furniture in it, I caſt my eye towards the drawers of the dreſſing-glaſs, and ſaw peep out, as it were, in one of the half-drawn drawers, the corner of a letter. I ſnatched it out, and found it ſuperſcribed by her,To Mr. Lovelace.The ſight of it made my heart leap, and I trembled ſo, that I could hardly open the ſeal. 

How does this damn'd Love unman me!—But nobody ever loved as I love!—It is even increaſed by her unworthy flight, and my diſappointment. Ingrateful creature, to fly from a paſſion thus ardently flaming! which, like the palm, riſes the more for being depreſſed and ſlighted! 

I will not give thee a copy of this letter. I owe her not ſo much ſervice. 

But wouldſt thou think, that this haughty promiſe-breaker could reſolve, as ſhe does, abſolutely and for ever to renounce me for what paſſed laſt night? That ſhe could reſolve to forego all her opening proſpects of reconciliation;thatreconciliation with a worthleſsfamily, on which ſhe had ſet her whole heart?—Yet ſhe does!—She acquits me of all obligation to her, and herſelf of all expectations from me!—And for what?—O that indeed I had given her real cauſe! Damn'd confounded Niceneſs, Prudery, Affectation, or pretty Ignorance, if not Affectation!—By my ſoul, Belford, I told thee all—I was more indebted to her ſtruggles, than to my own forwardneſs. I cannot ſupport my own reflections upon a decency ſo ill-requited.—She could not, ſhe would not have been ſo much a Harlowe in her reſentment had I deſerved, as Ioughtto have done, her reſentment. All ſhe feared, had then been over, and her own good-ſenſe, and even modeſty, would have taught her to make the beſt of it. 

But if ever again I get her into my hands,Artand moreArt,andCompulſiontoo, if ſhe make it neceſſary [and 'tis plain that nothing elſe will do], ſhall ſhe experience from the man whoſe fearofher has been above even his paſſionforher; and whoſe gentleneſs and forbearance ſhe has thusperfidiouſlytriumphed over. Well ſays the Poet,'Tis nobler like a lion to invadeWhen appetite directs, and ſeize my prey,Than to wait tamely, like a begging dog,Till dull conſent throws out the ſcraps of love. 

Thou knoweſt what I have ſo lately vowed—And yet, at times [cruel creature, and ingrateful as cruel!], I can ſubſcribe with too much truth to thoſe lines of another Poet:She reigns more fully in my ſoul than ever;She gariſons my breaſt, and mans againſt meEv'n my own rebel thoughts, with thouſand graces,Ten thouſand charms, and new-diſcover'd beauties! 

LETTER LIV. Mr.LOVELACE,ToJOHN BELFORD,Eſq
A Letter is put into my hands by Wilſon himſelf— 

Such a letter!— 

A letter from Miſs Howe to her cruel friend!— 

I made no ſcruple to open it. 

It is a miracle, that I fell not into fits at the reading of it; and at the thought of what might have been the conſequence, had it come to the hands ofthis Clariſſa Harlowe.Let my juſtly-excited rage excuſe my irreverence. 

Collins, tho' not his day, brought it this afternoon to Wilſon's, with a particular deſire, that it might be ſent with all ſpeed to Miſs Beaumont's lodgings, and given, if poſſible, into her own hands. He had before been here (at Mrs. Sinclair's), with intent to deliver it to her himſelf; but was told [too truly told!], that ſhe was abroad; but that they would give her any thing he ſhould leave for her, the moment ſhe returned.—But he cared not to truſt them with his buſineſs, and went away to Wilſon's (as I find by the deſcription of him at both places), and there left the letter; but not till he had a ſecond time called here, and found her not come in. 

The letter (which I ſhall incloſe; for it is too long to tranſcribe) will account to thee for his coming hither. 

O this deviliſh Miſs Howe!—Something muſt be reſolved upon, and done with that little Fury! 

THOU wilt ſee the margin of this curſed letter crouded with indices [☞]. I put them to mark theplaces devoted for vengeance, or requiring animadverſion. Return thou it to me the moment thou haſt read it. 

Read it here; and avoid trembling for me, if thou canſt. 

To MiſsLAETITIA BEAUMONT.
Wedneſday, June7.My deareſt Friend,YOU will perhaps think, that I have been too long ſilent. But I had begun two letters at different times ſince my laſt, and written a great deal each time; and with ſpirit enough, I aſſure you;☞incenſed as I was againſt the abominable wretch you are with; particularly on reading yours of the 21ſt of the paſt monthSee Letterxxvi.of this Vol. p.137.. 

☞ThefirſtI intended to keep open till I could give you ſome account of my proceedings with Mrs. Townſend. It was ſome days before I ſaw her: And this intervenient ſpace giving me time to re-peruſe what I had written, I thought it proper to lay that aſide, and to write in a ſtile a little leſs fervent;☞for you would have blamed me, I know, for the freedom of ſome of my expreſſions (execrations,☞if you pleaſe). And when I had gone a good way in theſecond,the change in your proſpects, on his communicating to you Miſs Montague's letter, and his better behaviour, occaſioning a change in your mind, I laid that aſide alſo. And in this uncertainty, thought I would wait to ſee the iſſue of affairs between you, before I wrote again; believing that all would ſoon be decided one way or other. 

I had ſtill, perhaps, held this reſolution (as every appearance, according to your letters, was more and more promiſing), had not the two paſſed daysfurniſhed me with intelligence which it highly imports you to know. 

☞But I muſt ſtop here, and take a little walk, to try to keep down that juſt indignation which riſes to my pen, when I am about to relate to you what I muſt communicate. 

I AM not my own miſtreſs enough—Then my mother—Always up and down—And watching as if I were writing to a fellow—But I will try if I can contain myſelf in tolerable bounds.☞— 

The women of the houſe where you are—O my dear—The women of the houſe—But you never thought highly of them—So it cannot be ſo very ſurprizing—Nor would you have ſtaid ſo long with them,☞had not the notion of removing to one of your own, made you leſs uneaſy, and leſs curious about their characters, and behaviour. Yet I couldnowwiſh,☞that you had been leſs reſerved among them—But I teaze you—In ſhort, my dear,☞you are certainly in a deviliſh houſe!—Be aſſured, that the woman is one of the vileſt of women!—Nor does ſhe go to you by her right name—Very true—Her name isnotSinclair—Nor is the ſtreet ſhe lives in, Dover-ſtreet.—Did you never go out by yourſelf, and diſcharge the coach or chair, and return by another coach or chair?☞If you did (yet I don't remember that you ever wrote to me, that you did), you would never have found your way to the vile houſe, either by the woman's name,Sinclair,or by the ſtreet's name, mentioned by that Doleman in his letter about the lodgingsVol.III.p.190.. 

☞The wretch might indeed have held out theſe falſe lights a little more excuſably, had the houſe been an honeſt houſe; and had his end only been to prevent miſchief from your brother—But this contrivancewas antecedent, as I think, to your brother's project: So that no excuſe can be made for his intentions at thetime—The man, whatever he maynowintend, was certainly then, eventhen,a villain in his heart!☞ 

☞I AM exceſſively concerned, that I ſhould be prevailed upon, betweenyourover-niceneſs, on one hand, and mymother's poſitiveneſs, on the other, to be ſatisfied without knowing how to direct to you at your lodgings. I think too, that the propoſal that I ſhould be put off to athird-handknowlege, or rather veiled in afirſt-handignorance, came from him—and that it was only acquieſced in by you, as it was by meSee Vol.III.p.263,and p.270.Where the Reader will obſerve, that the propoſal came from herſelf; which, as it was alſo mentioned by Mr. Lovelace (as will be ſeen in Miſs Harlowe's letter, p.297.) ſhe may be preſumed to have forgot. So that Clariſſa had a double inducement for acquieſcing with the propoſed method of carrying on the correſpondence between Miſs Howe and herſelf by Wilſon's conveyance, and by the name of Laetitia Beaumont., upon needleſs and weak conſiderations—Becauſe, truly, I might have it to ſay, if challenged, that I knew not where to ſend to you!—I am aſhamed of myſelf!—Had this been atfirſtexcuſable, it could not be a good reaſon for going on in the folly, when you had no liking to the houſe, and when he began to play tricks,☞and delay with you.—What! I was to miſtruſt myſelf, was I?—I was to allow it to be thought, that I could not keep my own ſecret?☞—But the houſe to be taken at this time, and at that time, led us both on—like fools,☞like tame fools in a ſtring.—Upon my life,☞my dear, this man is a vile, a contemptible villain—I muſt ſpeak out!—How has he laughedin his ſleeve at us both, I warrant, for I can't tell how long! 

And yet who could have thought, that a man of fortune, and ſomereputation[This Doleman, I mean;☞not your wretch, to be ſure!]—formerly a Rake indeed—[I have inquired after him—long ago; and ſo was the eaſier ſatisfied]—but married to a woman of family—having had a palſy-blow—and one would think a penitent—ſhould recommend ſuch a houſe—[Why,☞my dear, he could notinquireof it, but muſt find it to be bad]—to ſuch a man as Lovelace, to bring his future, nay, histhenſuppoſed bride, to? 

☞I WRITE, perhaps, with too much violence, to be clear. But I cannot help it. Yet I lay down my pen, and take it up every ten minutes, in order to write with ſome temper—My mother too in and out—What need I (ſhe aſks me) lock myſelf in, if I am only reading paſt correſpondencies?—for that is my pretence, when ſhe comes poking in with her face ſharpened to an edge,☞as I may ſay, by a curioſity that gives her more pain than pleaſure—The Lord forgive me;☞but I believe I ſhall huff her next time ſhe comes in. 

DoYouforgive me too, my dear. My motherought; becauſe ſhe ſays, I am my father's girl; and becauſe I am ſure I amhers.☞I don't know what to do—I don't know what to write next—I have ſo much to write, yet have ſo little patience, and ſo little opportunity. 

But I will tell you how I came by my intelligence. 

☞Thatbeing afact,and requiring the leſs attention, I will try to account to you forthat. 

Thus then it came about—'Miſs Lardner (whom you have ſeen at her couſin Biddulph's)ſaw you at St. James's church on Sunday was fortnight. She kept you in her eye during the whole time; but could not once obtain the notice of yours, tho' ſhe courteſy'd to you twice. She thought to pay her compliments to you when the Service was over; for ſhe doubted not but you were married—and for an odd reaſon—becauſe you came to church by yourſelf.☞—Every eye, as uſual, ſhe ſaid, was upon you; and this ſeeming to give you hurry, and you being nearer the door than ſhe, you ſlid out, before ſhe could get to you. But ſhe ordered her ſervant to follow you till you were houſed. This ſervant ſaw you ſtep into a chair, which waited for you; and you ordered the men to carry you to the place where they took you up. 

'The next day, Miſs Lardner ſent the ſame ſervant, out of mere curioſity, to make private inquiry whether Mr. Lovelace were, or were not, with you there. And this inquiry brought out,☞fromdifferentpeople, that the houſe was ſuſpected to be one of thoſe genteel wicked houſes, which receive and accommodate faſhionable people of both ſexes. 

'Miſs Lardner, confounded at this ſtrange intelligence, made further inquiry; injoining ſecrecy to the ſervant ſhe had ſent, as well as to the gentleman whom ſhe employed: Who had it confirmed from a rakiſh friend,☞who knew the houſe; and told him, that there were two houſes; the one, in which all decent appearances were preſerved, and gueſts rarely admitted; the other, the receptacle of thoſe who were abſolutely engaged, and broken to the vile yoke.'— 

☞Say—my dear creature—ſay—Shall I not execrate the wretch?—But words are weak—What can I ſay, that will ſuitably expreſs my abhorrence of ſucha villain as he muſt have been, when he meditated to bring a Clariſſa Harlowe to ſuch a place! 

'Miſs Lardner kept this to herſelf ſome days, not knowing what to do; for ſhe loves you, and admires you of all women. At laſt, ſhe revealed it, but in confidence, to Miſs Biddulph, by letter. Miſs Biddulph, in like confidence, being afraid it would diſtractme,were I to know it, communicated it to Miſs Lloyd; and ſo, like a whiſper'd ſcandal, it paſſed through ſeveral canals; and then it came to me. Which was not till laſt Monday.' 

I thought I ſhould have fainted upon the ſurpriſing communication. But rage taking place, it blew away the ſudden illneſs.☞I beſought Miſs Lloyd to re-injoin ſecrecy to every-one. I told her, that I would not for the world, that my mother,☞or any of your family, ſhould know it. And I inſtantly cauſed a truſty friend to make what inquiries he could about Tomlinſon. 

☞I had thoughts to have done it before: But not imagining it to be needful, and little thinking that you could be in ſuch a houſe, and as you were pleaſed with your changed proſpects, I forbore. And the rather forbore,☞as the matter is ſo laid, that Mrs. Hodges is ſuppoſed to know nothing of the projected treaty of accommodation; but, on the contrary, that it was deſigned to be a ſecret to her, and to every-body but immediate parties; and it was Mrs. Hodges that I had propoſed to found by aſecondhand. 

☞Now, my dear, it is certain, without applying to that too-much favoured houſekeeper, that there is not ſuch a man within ten miles of your Uncle. Very true! OneTomkinsthere is, about four miles off; but he is a day-labourer: And oneThompſon,about five miles diſtant the other way; but he is a par•ſh ſchoolmaſter, poor, and about ſeventy. 

☞A man, tho' but of 800l.a year, cannot come from one county to ſettle in another, but everybody in both muſt know it, and talk of it. 

☞Mrs. Hodges may yet be ſounded at a diſtance, if you will. Your uncle is an old man. Old men imagine themſelves under obligation to their paramours, if younger than themſelves, and ſeldom keep any thing from their knowlege. But if we ſuppoſe him to make a ſecret of the deſigned treaty,☞it is impoſſible,beforethat treaty was thought of, but ſhe muſt have ſeen him, at leaſt haveheardyour uncle ſpeak praiſefully of a man he is ſaid to be ſo intimate with, let him have been ever ſo little a while in thoſe parts. 

☞Yet, methinks, the ſtory is ſo plauſible. Tomlinſon, as you deſcribe him, is ſo good a man, and ſo much of a gentleman; the end to be anſwered by his being an impoſtor,☞ſo muchmore than neceſſary,if Lovelace has villainy in his head; and as you are in ſuch a houſe—Your wretch's behaviour to him was ſo petulant and lordly;☞and Tomlinſon's anſwer ſo full of ſpirit and circumſtance; and then what he communicated to you of Mr. Hickman's application to your uncle,☞and of Mrs. Norton's to your mother (ſome of which particulars, I am ſatisfied, his vile agent Joſeph Leman could not reveal to his viler employer);☞his preſſing on the marriage-day, in the name of your uncle, which it could not anſwer anywickedpurpoſe for him to do; and what he writes of your uncle's propoſal,☞to have it thought that you were married from the time that you had lived in one houſe together; and that to be made to agree with the time of Mr. Hickman's viſit to your uncle: The inſiſting on a truſty perſon's being preſent at the ceremony,☞at that uncle's nomination—Theſe things make me willing to try for a tolerable conſtruction to be made of all; tho' I am ſo muchpuzzled, by what occurs on both ſides of the queſtion,☞that I cannot but abhor the deviliſh wretch, whoſe inventions and contrivances are for ever employing an inquiſitive head,☞without affording the means of abſolute detection. 

But this is what I am ready to conjecture, that Tomlinſon, ſpecious as he is, is a machine of Lovelace; and that he is employed for ſome end, which has not yet been anſwered.☞—This is certain, that not only Tomlinſon, but Mennell, who, I think, attended you more than once at this vile houſe, muſt know it tobea vile houſe. 

What can you then think of Tomlinſon's declaring himſelf infavourof it, upon inquiry? 

Lovelace too muſt know it to be ſo; if not before he brought you to it, ſoon after. 

☞Perhaps thecompany he found there,may be the moſt probable way of accounting for his bearing with the houſe, and for his ſtrange ſuſpenſions of marriage, when it was in his power to call ſuch an angel of a woman his.— 

☞O my dear, the man is a villain! the greateſt of villains, in every light!—I am convinced that he is—And this Doleman muſt be another of his implements! 

☞There are ſo many wretches who thinkthatto be no ſin, which is one of the greateſt, and the moſt ingrateful, of all ſins; to ruin young creatures of our ſex, who place their confidence in them; that the wonder is leſs than the ſhame, that people of figure, ofappearance,at leaſt, are found to promote the horrid purpoſes of profligates of fortune and intereſt!— 

☞But can I think (you will aſk, with indignant aſtoniſhment), that Lovelace can have deſigns upon your honour? 

☞That ſuch deſigns hehas had,if heſtillhold them not, I can have no doubt, now that I knowthe houſe he has brought you to, to be a vile one. This is a clue that has led me to account for all his behaviour to you ever ſince you have been in his hands. 

Allow me a brief retroſpection of it all. 

☞We both know, that Pride, Revenge, and a delight to tread in unbeaten paths, are principal ingredients in the character of this finiſhed libertine. 

☞He hates all your family, yourſelf excepted; and I have ſeveral times thought, that I have ſeen him ſtung and mortified, that Love has obliged him to kneel at your footſtool, becauſe you are aHarlowe.☞—Yet is this wretch a Savage in Love.—Love that humanizes the fierceſt ſpirits, has not been able to ſubdue his.☞Hispride,and the credit which a fewplauſible qualities,ſprinkled among hisodious ones,☞have given him, have ſecured him too good a reception from our eye-judging, our undiſtinguiſhing, our ſelf-flattering, our too-confiding Sex, to make aſſiduity and obſequiouſneſs, and a conqueſt of his unruly paſſions, any part of his ſtudy. 

☞He has ſome reaſon for his animoſity toallthe men, and toonewoman of your family. He has always ſhewn you, and all his own family too, that he prefers his Pride to his Intereſt.☞He is a declared marriage-hater: A notorious intriguer: Full of his inventions; and glorying in them.—He never could draw you in to declarations of Love: Nor, till yourwiſerelations perſecuted you, as they did, to receive his addreſſes as a Lover.☞—He knew, that you profeſſedly diſliked him for his immoralities; he could not therefore juſtly blame you, for the coldneſs and indifference of your behaviour to him. 

☞The prevention of miſchief was your firſt main view in the correſpondence he drew you into.He ought not, then, to have wonder'd, that you declared your preference of theSingle Lifetoanymatrimonial engagement. He knew, that this wasalwaysyour preference; and that before he tricked you away ſo artfully.☞What was his conduct to you afterwards, that you ſhould of a ſudden change it? 

Thus was your whole behaviour regular, conſiſtent, and dutiful to thoſe to whom, by birth, you owed duty; and neither prudiſh, coquetiſh, nor tyrannical to him. 

☞He had agreed to go on with you upon thoſe your own terms, and to rely only on his own merits and future reformation, for your favour. 

It was plain to me, indeed, to whom you communicated all thatyou knowof your own heart, tho' not all of it thatI found out,that Love had pretty early gained footing in it. And this you yourſelf would have diſcovered ſooner than you did,☞had not his alarming, his unpolite, his rough conduct, kept it under. 

☞I knew, by experience, that Love is a fire that is not to be played with, without burning one's fingers: I knew it to be a dangerous thing for two ſingle perſons of different ſexes, to enter into familiarity and correſpondence with each other; ſince, as to the latter, muſt not a perſon be capable of premeditated art, who can ſit down to write, and not write from the heart?—And a woman to write her heart to a man practiſed in deceit, or even to a man of ſome character, what advantage does it give him over her? 

☞As this man's vanity had made him imagine, that no woman could be proof againſt Love, when his addreſs was honourable; no wonder that he ſtruggled, like a lion held in toils, againſt a paſſion that he thought not returned.—And how could you,at firſt,ſhew a return in love,〈◊〉fierce a ſpirit, and who had ſeduc••〈…〉vile artifices, but to the approval of thoſe artifices? 

☞Hence, perhaps, it is not difficult to believe, that it became poſſible for ſuch a wretch as this to give way to his old prejudices againſt marriage; and to that Revenge which had always been a firſt paſſion with him. 

This is the only way, I think, to account for his horrid views in bringing you to a vile houſe. 

And now may not all the reſt be naturally accounted for?☞—His delays—His teazing ways—His bringing you to bear with his lodging in the ſame houſe—His making you paſs to the people of it, as his wife; tho' reſtrictively ſo, yet with hope,☞no doubt (vileſt of villains as he is!), to take you at advantage.— 

☞His bringing you into the company of his libertine companions; The attempt of impoſing upon you that Miſs Partington for a bedfellow, very probably his own invention, for the worſt of purpoſes; His terrifying you at many different times; His obtruding himſelf upon you when you went out to church; no doubt to prevent your finding out what the people were; The advantages he made of your brother's fooliſh project with Singleton. 

See, my dear, how naturally all this follows from the diſcovery made by Miſs Lardner.—See how the monſter,☞whom I thought, and ſo often called, afool,comes out to have been all the time one of the greateſt villains in the world!☞ 

But if this be ſo, what (it would be aſked by an indifferent perſon) has hitherto ſaved you? Glorious creature!—What (morally ſpeaking) but your watchfulneſs! What but That, and the majeſty of your virtue;the native dignity,which, in a ſituation ſo very difficult (friendleſs, deſtitute,paſſing for a wife, caſt into the company of creatures accuſtomed to betray and ruin innocent hearts) has hitherto enabled you to baffle, overawe, and confound, ſuch a dangerous libertine as this; ſo habitually remorſeleſs, as you have obſerved him to be; ſo very various in his temper; ſo inventive; ſo ſeconded, ſo ſupported, ſo inſtigated, too probably, as he has been!—Thatnative dignity,thatheroiſmI will call it, which has, on all proper occaſions, exerted itſelf, in itsfullluſtre,☞unmingled with that charming obligingneſs and condeſcending ſweetneſs, which is evermore theſoftnerof that dignity, when your mind is free and unapprehenſive! 

☞Let me ſtop to admire, and to bleſs my beloved friend, who, unhappily for herſelf, at an age ſo tender, unacquainted as ſhe was with the world, and with the vile arts of libertines, having been called upon to ſuſtain the hardeſt and moſt ſhocking trials, from perſecuting Relations on one hand, and from a villainous Lover on the other, has been enabled to give ſuch an illuſtrious example of fortitude and prudence, as never woman gave before her; and who, as I have heretofore obſervedSee p.24., has made a far greater figure in adverſity, than ſhe poſſibly could have made, had all her ſhining qualities been exerted in their full force and power,☞by the continuance of that proſperous run of fortune, which attended her for Eighteen years of life out of Nineteen. 

☞BUT now, my dear, do I apprehend, that you are in greater danger than ever yet you have been in; if you are not married in a week; and yet ſtay in this abominable houſe. For were you out of it, I own, I ſhould not be much afraid for you. 

Theſe are my thoughts, on the moſt deliberate conſideration:☞'That he is now convinced, that he has not been able to draw you off your guard: That therefore, if he can obtain no new advantage over you, as he goes along, he is reſolved to do you all thepoor juſticethat it is in the power of ſuch a wretch as he, to do you. He is the rather induced to this, as he ſees, that all his own family have warmly engaged themſelves in your cauſe; and that it is hishigheſt intereſtto be juſt to you.☞Then the horrid wretch loves you, as well he may, above all women. I have no doubt of this—Withſucha love as ſuch a wretch is capable of: Withſucha love as Herod loved his Mariamne.☞—He is now therefore, very probably, at laſt, in earneſt.' 

I took time for inquiries of different natures, as I knew by the train you are in, that whatever his deſigns are, they cannot ripen either for good or evil,☞till ſomething ſhall reſult from this new device of his about Tomlinſon and your uncle. 

DeviceI have no doubt that it is, whatever this dark, this impenetrable ſpirit, intends by it. 

☞And yet I find it to be true, that Counſellor Williams (whom Mr. Hickman knows to be a man of eminence in his profeſſion) has actually as good as finiſhed the ſettlements: That two draughts of them have been made;☞one avowedly to be ſent to one Captain Tomlinſon, as the clerk ſays:—And I find, that a licenſe has actually been more than once endeavoured to be obtained; and that difficulties have hitherto been made, equally to Lovelace's vexation and diſappointment.☞My mother's proctor, who is very intimate with the proctor applied to by the wretch, has come at this information in confidence; and hints, that, as Mr. Lovelace is a man of high fortunes, theſe difficulties will probably be got over. 

But here follow the cauſes of my apprehenſion of your danger;☞which I ſhould not have had a thought of (ſince nothingveryvile has yet been attempted) but on finding what a houſe you are in, and, on that diſcovery, laying together, and ruminating on paſt occurrences. 

'You are obliged, from the preſent favourable appearances,☞to give him your company when ever he requeſts it.—You are under a neceſſity of forgetting, or ſeeming to forget, paſt diſobligations; and to receive his addreſſes as thoſe of a betrothed lover.—You will incur the cenſure of prudery and affectation, even perhaps in your own apprehenſion, if you keep him at that diſtance which has hitherto been your ſecurity.—His ſudden (and as ſuddenly recovered) illneſs,☞has given him an opportunity to find out, that you love him. [Alas, my dear, I knew you loved him!] He is, as you relate, every hour more and more an incroacher,☞upon it. He has ſeem'd to change his nature, and is all love and gentleneſs. The wolf has put on the ſheep's cloathing; yet more than once has ſhewn his teeth, and his hardly ſheathed claws.☞The inſtance you have given of his freedom with your perſon, which you could not but reſent; and yet, as matters are circumſtanced between you, could not but paſs over, when Tomlinſon's letter called you into his companySee p.258, 259, 260,of this Volume., ſhew the advantage he has now over you;☞and alſo, that if he can obtain greater, he will.—And for this very reaſon (as I apprehend) it is, that Tomlinſon is introduced; that is to ſay, to give you the greater ſecurity,☞and to be a mediator, if mortal offence be given you, by any villainous attempt.—The day ſeems not now to be ſomuch in your power as it ought to be, ſince That now partly depends on your uncle, whoſe preſence, at your own motion, he has wiſhed on the occaſion.—A wiſh, were all real, very unlikely, I think, to be granted.' 

☞And thus ſituated, ſhould he offer greater freedoms, muſt you not forgive him? 

I fear nothing (as I know who has ſaid), that devil carnate or incarnate can fairly do againſt a virtue ſo eſtabliſhedSee Mrs. Norton's letter, p.31.of this Volume.—But ſurprizes,☞my dear, in ſuch a houſe as that you are in, and in ſuch circumſtances as I have mentioned, I greatly fear!☞—The man, one, who has already triumphed over perſons worthy of his alliance. 

☞What then have you to do, but to fly this houſe, this infernal houſe!—O that your heart would let you ſlyhim! 

☞If you ſhould be diſpoſed ſo to do, Mrs. Townſend ſhall be ready at your command.—But if you meet with no impediments, no new cauſes of doubt, I think your reputation in the eye of the world, tho' not your happineſs, is concerned, that you ſhould be his.—And yet I cannot bear, that theſe libertines ſhould be rewarded for their villainy with the beſt of the Sex,☞when the worſt of it are too good for them. 

But if you meet with the leaſt ground for ſuſpicion; if he would detain you at the odious houſe, or wiſh you to ſtay, now you know what the people are,☞flyhim,whatever your proſpects are, as well asthem. 

In one of your next airings, if you have no other way,☞refuſe to return with him. Namemefor your intelligencer, that you are in a bad houſe; and if you think you cannot now break with him, ſeem rather to believe that he may not know it to be ſo; and that I do not believe he does: Andyet this belief in us both muſt appear to be very groſs.☞ 

☞But ſuppoſe you deſire, and inſiſt upon it, to go out of town for the air, this ſultry weather?—You may plead your health for ſo doing. He dare not reſiſt ſuch a plea. Your brother's fooliſh ſcheme, I am told, is certainly given up; ſo you need not be afraid on that account. 

If you do not fly the houſe upon reading of this, or ſome way or other get out of it, I ſhall judge of his power over you, by the little you will have over either him or yourſelf. 

☞One of my informants has made ſlight inquiries, concerning Mrs. Fretchville. Did he ever name to you the ſtreet or ſquare ſhe lived in?—I don't remember, that you, in any of yours, mentioned either to me.☞Strange, very ſtrange, This, I think! No ſuch perſon or houſe can be found, near any of the new ſtreets or ſquares, where the lights I had from your letters led me to imagine her houſe might be.☞—Aſk him, What ſtreet the houſe is in, if he has not told you. And let me know. If he make a difficulty of that circumſtance, it will amount to a detection.☞—And yet, I think, you have enough without this. 

I ſhall ſend this long letter by Collins, who changes his day to oblige me; and that he may try (now I know where you are), to get it into your own hands. If he cannot, he will leave it at Wilſon's. As none of our letters by that conveyance have miſcarried, when you have been in moreapparentlydiſagreeable ſituations than you are in at preſent, I hope that This will go ſafe, if Collins ſhould be obliged to leave it there. 

☞I wrote a ſhort letter to you in my firſt agitations. It contained not above twenty lines, all full of fright, alarm, and execration. But being afraid, that my vehemence would too much affectyou, I thought it better to wait a little, as well for the reaſons already hinted at, as to be able to give you as many particulars as I could; and my thoughts upon all. And now, I think, taking to your aid other circumſtances as theyhaveoffer'd, ormayoffer, you will be ſufficiently armed to reſiſt all his machinations, be they what they will. 

☞One word more. Command me up, if I can be of the leaſt ſervice or pleaſure to you. I value not ſame: I value not cenſure; nor even life itſelf, I verily think, as I do your honour, and your friendſhip—For, is not your honour my honour? And is not your friendſhip the pride of my life? 

May heaven preſerve you, my deareſt creature, in honour and ſafety, is the prayer, the hourly prayer, of 

Your ever-faithful and affectionateANNA HOWE.Thurſday Morn.5. I have written all night.To MiſsHOWE.
My deareſt creature,HOW you have ſhock'd, confounded, ſurpriz'd, aſtoniſh'd me, by your dreadful communication!—Myheart is too weakto bear up againſt ſuch a ſtroke as this!—When all hope was with me! When my proſpects were ſo much mended!—But can there be ſuch villainy in men, as in this vile principal, and equally vile agent! 

I am really ill—Very ill—Grief and ſurprize, and, now I will ſay, deſpair, have overcome me!—All, all, you have laid down as conjecture, appears to me now to bemorethan conjecture! 

O that your mother would have the goodneſs to permit me the preſence of the only comforter that myafflicted, my half-broken heart, could be raiſed by! But I charge you, think not of coming up without her indulgent permiſſion.—I am too ill, at preſent, my dear, to think of combating with this dreadful man; and of flying from this horrid houſe!—My bad writing will ſhew you this.—But my illneſs will be my preſent ſecurity, ſhould he indeed have meditated villainy.—Forgive, O forgive me, my deareſt friend, the trouble I have given you!—All muſt ſoon—But why add I grief to grief, and trouble to trouble?—But I charge you, my beloved creature, not to think of coming up, without your mother's leave, to the truly deſolate, and broken-ſpirited 

CLARISSA HARLOWE.WELL, Jack!—And what thinkeſt thou of this laſt letter?—Miſs Howe values not eitherfameorcenſure; and thinkeſt thou, that this letter will not bring the little fury up, tho' ſhe could procure no other conveyance than her higgler's paniers, one for herſelf, the other for her maid?—She knows where to come now!—Many a little villain have I puniſhed for knowing more than I would have her know; and that by adding to her knowlege and experience.—What thinkeſt thou, Belford, if by getting hither this virago, and givingcauſefor a lamentable letter from her, to the fair fugitive, I ſhould be able to recoverher?—Would ſhe not viſit that friend inherdiſtreſs, thinkeſt thou, whoſe intended viſit to her inhers,brought her into the condition ſhe herſelf had ſo perfidiouſly eſcaped from? 

Let me enjoy the thought! 

Shall I ſend this letter?—Thou ſeeſt I have left room, if I fail in the exact imitation of ſo charming a hand, to avoid too ſtrict a ſcrutiny.—Do they not both deſerve it of me?—Seeſt thou not how the raveing girl threatens her mother?—Ought ſhe not to be puniſh'd?—And can I be a worſe devil, or villain, ormonſter, than ſhe calls me in this letter; and has called me in her former letters; were I to puniſh them both, as my vengeance urges me to puniſh them. And when I have executed That my vengeance, how charmingly ſatisfied may they both go down into the country, and keep houſe together, and have a much better reaſon than their pride could give them, for living the Single-life they have both ſeemed ſo fond of? 

I will ſet about tranſcribing it this moment, I think. I can reſolve afterwards. Yet what has poor Hickman done to deſerve this of me?—But gloriouſly would it puniſh the mother (as well as daughter) for all her ſordid avarice; and for her undutifulneſs to honeſt Mr. Howe, whoſe heart ſhe actually broke. I am on tip-toe, Jack, to enter upon this project.—Is not one country as good to me as another, if I ſhould be obliged to take another tour upon it? 

BUT I will not venture. Mr. Hickman is a good man, they tell me. I love a good man. I hope one of theſe days to be a good man myſelf. Beſides, I have heard within this week, ſomething of this honeſt fellow that ſhews he has a ſoul; when I thought, if he had one, that it lay a little of the deepeſt to emerge to notice, except on very extraordinary occaſions; and that then it preſently ſunk again into itsCellula adipoſa.—The man is aplump man.—Didſt ever ſee him, Jack? 

But the principal reaſon that withholds me (for 'tis a tempting project!) is, for fear of being utterly blown up, if I ſhould not be quick enough with my letter, or if Miſs Howe ſhould deliberate on ſetting out, or try her mother's conſent firſt; in which time, a letter from my frighted beauty might reach her; for I have no doubt, where-ever ſhe has refuged, but her firſt work was to write to her vixen friend. I will therefore go on patiently; and take my revenge upon the little fury at my leiſure. 

But, in ſpite of my compaſſion for Hickman, whoſe better character is ſometimes my envy, and who is one of thoſe mortals that bring clumſineſs into credit with themothers,to the diſgrace of us clever fellows, and often to our diſappointment with thedaughters; and who has been very buſy in aſſiſting theſe double-arm'd beauties againſt me; I ſwear by all theDii Majores,as well asMinores,that I will have Miſs Howe, if I cannot have her more exalted friend!—And then, if there be ſo much flaming love between theſe girls as they pretend, what will my charmer profit by her eſcape? 

And now, that I ſhall permit Miſs Howe to reign a little longer, let me aſk thee, If thou haſt not, in the incloſed letter, afreſhinſtance, that a great many of my difficulties with her ſiſter-toaſt are owing to this flighty girl?—'Tis true, that here was naturally a confounded ſharp wintry air; and, if a little cold water was thrown into the path, no wonder that it was inſtantly frozen; and that a poor honeſt traveller found it next to impoſſible to keep his way; one foot ſliding back as faſt as the other advanced; to the endangering of his limbs or neck. But yet I think it impoſſible, that ſhe ſhould have baffled me as ſhe has done (novice as ſhe is, and never before from under her parents wing), had ſhe not been armed by a virago, who was formerly very near ſhewing, that ſhe could better adviſe than practiſe. But this, I believe, I have ſaid more than once before. 

I am loth toreproach myſelf,now the cruel creature has eſcaped me; for what would that do, but add to my torment? Since evils ſelf-cauſed, and avoidable, admit not of palliation or comfort. And yet, ifthoutelleſt me, that allherſtrength was owing tomyweakneſs, and that I have been a curſed coward in this whole affair; why then, Jack, I may bluſh, and be vexed; but, by my ſoul, I cannot contradict thee. 

But this, Belford, I hope—that if I can turn the poiſon of this letter into wholſome aliment; that is to ſay, if I can make uſe of it to my advantage; I ſhall havethyfree conſent to do it. 

I am always careful to open covers cautiouſly, and to preſerve ſeals intire. I will draw out from this curſed letter an alphabet. Nor was Nick Rowe ever half ſo diligent to learn Spaniſh, at the Quixote recommendation of a certain Peer, as I will be to gain a maſtery of this vixen's hand. 

LETTER LV. MiſsCLARISSA HARLOWE,To MiſsHOWE.
Thurſday Evening, June8.AFter my laſt, ſo full of other hopes, the contents of This will ſurpriſe you. O my deareſt friend, the man has at laſt proved himſelf to be a villain! It was with the utmoſt difficulty laſt night, that I preſerved myſelf from the vileſt diſhonour. He extorted from me a promiſe of forgiveneſs; and that I would ſee him next day, as if nothing had happened: But if it were poſſible to eſcape from a wretch, who, as I have too much reaſon to believe, formed a plot to fire the houſe, to frighten me, almoſt naked, into his arms, how could I ſee him next day? 

I have eſcaped, Heaven be praiſed, I have! And have now no other concern, than that I fly from the only hope that could have made ſuch an huſband tolerable to me; The reconciliation with my friends, ſo agreeably undertaken by my uncle. 

All my preſent hope is, To find ſome reputable family, or perſon of my own Sex, who is obliged to go beyond ſea, or who lives abroad; I care not whither; but if I might chooſe, in ſome one of our American colonies—Never to be heard of more by my relations, whom I have ſo grievouſly offended. 

Nor let your generous heart be moved at what I write: If I can eſcape the dreadfulleſt part of my father's malediction (for the temporary part is already in a manner fulfilled, which makes me tremble in apprehenſion of the other), I ſhall think the wreck of my worldly fortunes a happy compoſition. 

Neither is there need of the renewal of your ſo often tender'd goodneſs to me: For I have with me rings and other valuables, that were ſent me with my cloaths, which will turn into money, to anſwer all I can want, till Providence ſhall be pleaſed to put me into ſome way to help myſelf, if, for my further puniſhment, my life is to be lengthen'd beyond my wiſhes. 

Impute not this ſcheme, my beloved friend, either to dejection on one hand, or to that romantic turn on the other, which we have ſuppoſed generally to obtain with our Sex, from Fifteen to Twenty-two: For, be pleaſed to conſider my unhappy ſituation, in the light in which it really muſt appear to every conſiderate perſon, who knows it. In the firſt place, the man, who has had the aſſurance to think me, and to endeavour to make me, hisproperty,will hunt me, and to place to place, and ſearch after me as an eſtray: And he knows he may do ſo with impunity; for whom have I to protect me from him? 

Then as to my eſtate, the enviable eſtate, which has been the original cauſe of all my misfortunes, it ſhall never be mine upon litigated terms. What is there in being enabled to boaſt, that I am worth more thanI can uſe,orwiſh to uſe?—And if my power is circumſcribed, I ſhall not have that to anſwer for, which I ſhould have, if I did not uſe it as I ought: Which very few do. I ſhall have no huſband, of whoſe intereſt I ought to be ſo regardful, as to prevent me doingmorethan juſtice to others, that I may not doleſsto him.—If therefore, my father will be pleaſed (as I ſhall preſume, in proper time, to propoſe to him) to pay two annuities out of it, one to mydear Mrs. Norton, which may make her eaſy for the remainder of her life, as ſhe is now growing into years; the other of 50l. per annum,to the ſame good woman, for the uſe ofMy poor,as I have had the vanity to call a certain ſet of people, concerning whom ſhe knows all my mind; that ſo as few as poſſible may ſuffer by the conſequences of my error; God bleſs them, and give them heart's-eaſe and content with the reſt. 

Other reaſons for my taking the ſtep I have hinted at, are theſe: 

This wicked man knows I have no friend in the world but you: Your neighbourhood therefore would be the firſt he would ſeek for me in, were you to think it poſſible for me to be concealed in it: And in this caſe You might be ſubjected to inconveniencies greater even than thoſe which you have already ſuſtained on my account. 

From my couſin Morden, were he to come, I could not hope protection; ſince, by his letter to me, it is evident, that my brother has engaged him in his party: Nor would I, by any means, ſubject ſo worthy a man to danger; as might be the caſe, from the violence of this ungovernable ſpirit. 

Theſe things conſidered, what better method can I take, than to go abroad to ſome one of the Engliſh colonies; where nobody but yourſelf ſhall know anything of me; nor You, let me tell you, preſently, nor till I am fixed, and, if it pleaſe God, in a courſe of living tolerably to my mind. For it is no ſmall part of my concern, that my indiſcretions have laid ſo heavy a tax upon You, my dear friend, to whom, once, I hoped to give more pleaſure than pain. 

I am at preſent at one Mrs. Moore's at Hampſtead. My heart miſgave me at coming to this village, becauſe I had been here with him more than once: But the coach hither was ſo ready a conveniency, that I knew not what to do better. Then I ſhall ſtay here no longer than till I can receive youranſwer to this: In which you will be pleaſed to let me know, if I cannot be hid, according to your former contrivance [Happy, had I given into it at the time!] by Mrs. Townſend's aſſiſtance, till the heat of his ſearch be over. The Deptford road, I imagine, will be the right direction, to hear of a paſſage, and to get ſafely aboard. 

O why was the great fiend of all unchained, and permitted to aſſume ſo ſpecious a form, and yet allowed to conceal his feet and his talons, till with the one he was ready to trample upon my honour, and to ſtrike the other into my heart!—And what had I done, that he ſhould be let looſe particularly upon me! 

Forgive me this murmuring queſtion, the effect of my impatience, myguiltyimpatience, I doubt: For, as I have eſcaped with my honour, and nothing but my worldly proſpects, and my pride, my ambition, and my vanity, have ſuffered in this wreck of my hopefuller fortunes, may I not ſtill be more happy than I deſerve to be? And is it not in my own power ſtill, by the divine favour, to ſecure the great ſtake of all? And who knows, that this very path into which my inconſideration has thrown me, ſtrew'd as it is with briars and thorns, which tear in pieces my gaudier trappings, may not be the right path to lead me into the great road to my future happineſs; which might have been endanger'd by evil communication? 

And after all, Are there not ſtill more deſerving perſons than I, who never failed in any capital point of duty, that have been more humbled than myſelf; and ſome too, by the errors of parents and relations, by the tricks and baſeneſs of guardians, and truſtees, and in which their own raſhneſs or folly had no part? 

I will then endeavour to make the beſt of my preſent lot. And join with me, my beſt, my only friend, in praying, That my puniſhment may end here; and that my preſent afflictions may be ſanctified to me. 

This letter will enable you to account for a line ortwo, which I ſent to Wilſon's, to be carried to you, only for a feint, to get his ſervant out of the way. He ſeemed to be left, as I thought, for a ſpy upon me. But returning too ſoon, I was forced to write a few lines for him to carry to his Maſter, to a tavern near Doctors-Commons, with the ſame view: And this happily anſwered my end. 

I wrote early in the morning a bitter letter to the wretch, which I left for him obvious enough; and I ſuppoſe he has it by this time. I kept no copy of it. I ſhall recollect the contents, and give you the particulars of all, at more leiſure. 

I am ſure you will approve of my eſcape—The rather, as the people of the houſe muſt be very vile: For they, and that Dorcas too, did hear me (I know they did) cry out for help: If the fire had been other than a villainous plot (altho' in the morning, to blind them, I pretended to think it otherwiſe), they would have been alarmed as much as I; and have run in, hearing me ſcream, tocomfort me,ſuppoſing my terror was the fire; torelieve me,ſuppoſing it were anything elſe. But the vile Dorcas went away, as ſoon as ſhe ſaw the wretch throw his arms about me!—Bleſs me, my dear, I had only my ſlippers and an under-petticoat on. I was frighted out of my bed, by her cries of fire; and that I ſhould be burnt to aſhes in a moment!—And ſhe to go away, and never to return, nor any-body elſe: And yet I heard womens voices in the next room; indeed I did.—An evident contrivance of them all:—God be praiſed, I am out of their houſe! 

My terror is not yet over: I can hardly think myſelf ſafe: Every well-dreſſed man I ſee from my windows, whether on horſeback or on foot, I think to be him. 

I know you will expedite an anſwer. A man and horſe will be procured me to-morrow early, to carry This. To be ſure, you cannot return an anſwer by theſame man, becauſe you muſt ſee Mrs. Townſend firſt: Nevertheleſs, I ſhall wait with impatience till youcan; having no friend but you to apply to; and being ſuch a ſtranger to this part of the world, that I know not which way to turn myſelf; whither to go; nor what to do!—What a dreadful hand have I made of it! 

Mrs. Moore, at whoſe houſe I am, is a widow, and of a good character: And of this, one of her neighbours, of whom I bought a handkerchief, purpoſely to make inquiry before I would venture, informed me. 

I will not ſet my foot out of doors, till I have your direction: And I am the more ſecure, having dropt words to the people of the houſe where the coach ſet me down, as if I expected a chariot to meet me in my way to Hendon, a village a little diſtance from this.—And when I left their houſe, I walked backward and forward upon the hill, at firſt not knowing what to do, and afterwards, to be certain that I was not watched, before I ventured to inquire after a lodging. 

You will direct for me, my dear, by the name of Mrs. Harriot Lucas. 

Had I not made my eſcape when I did, I was reſolved to attempt it again and again. He was gone to the Commons for a licence, as he wrote me word; for I refuſed to ſee him, notwithſtanding the promiſe he extorted from me. 

How hard, how next-to impoſſible, my dear, to avoid many leſſer deviations, when we are betrayed into a capital one! 

For fear I ſhould not get away at my firſt effort, I had appriſed him, that I would not ſet eye upon him under a week, in order to gain myſelf time for it in different ways—And were I ſo to have been watched, as to have made it neceſſary, I would, after ſuch an inſtance of the connivance of the women of the houſe, have run out into the ſtreet, and thrown myſelf into thenext houſe I could have enter'd, or claimed protection from the firſt perſon I had met—Women to deſert the cauſe of a poor creature, of their own Sex, in ſuch a ſituation, what muſt they be!—Then, ſuch poor guilty ſort of figures did they make in the morning, after he was gone out—ſo earneſt to get me up ſtairs, and to convince me, by the ſcorched window-boards, and burnt curtains and vallens, that the fire was real—that (although I ſeemed to believe all they would have me believe) I was more and more reſolved to get out of their houſe at all adventures. 

When I began, I thought to write but a few lines. But, be my ſubject what it will, I know not how to conclude, when I write to you. It wasalwaysſo: It is not therefore owing peculiarly to that moſt intereſting and unhappy ſituation, which you will allow, however, to engroſs, at preſent, the whole mind of 

Your unhappy, but ever-affectionate,CLARISSA HARLOWE.LETTER LVI. Mr.LOVELACE,ToJOHN BELFORD,Eſq
Friday morning, paſt Two o'clock.IO Triumphe!Io Clariſſa, ſing!—Once more, what a happy man thy friend!—A ſilly dear novice, to be heard to tell the coachman whither to carry her!—And to go toHampſtead,of all the villages about London!—The place where we had been together more than once! 

Methinks I am ſorry ſhe managed no better!—I ſhall find the recovery of her too eaſy a taſk, I fear! Had ſhe but known, how much difficulty enhances the value of any thing with me, and had ſhe had the leaſt notion of obliging me, ſhe would never have ſtopt ſhort atHampſtead,ſurely. 

Well, but after all this exultation, thou wilt aſk,If I have already got back my charmer?—I have not.—But knowing where ſhe is, is almoſt the ſame thing as having her in my power: And it delights me to think, how ſhe will ſtart and tremble, when I firſt pop upon her! How ſhe will look with conſcious guilt, that will more than wipe off my guilt of Wedneſday night, when ſhe ſees her injured lover, and acknowleged huſband, from whom, the greateſt of felonies, ſhe would have ſtollen herſelf. 

But thou wilt be impatient to know how this came about. Read the incloſed here, and remember the inſtructions, which, from time to time, I have given my fellow, in apprehenſion of ſuch an elopement; and that will tell thee all, and what I may reaſonably expect from the raſcal's diligence and management, if he wiſhes ever to ſee my face again. 

I received it about half an hour ago, juſt as I was going to lie down in my cloaths: And it has made me ſo much alive, that, midnight as it is, I have ſent for a Blunt's chariot, to attend me here by day-peep, withmy uſual coachman,if poſſible; and knowing not elſe what to do with myſelf, I ſat down, and, in the joy of my heart, have not only wrote thus far, but have concluded upon the meaſures I ſhall take when admitted to her preſence: For well am I aware of the difficulties I ſhall have to contend with from her perverſeneſs. 

Honnored Sur,THIS is to ſertifie your honner, as how I am heer at Hameſtet, wher I have found out my Lady to be in logins at one Mrs. Moore's, near upon Hameſtet hethe. And I have ſo ordered matters, that her Ladiſhip cannot ſtur but I muſt have notice of her goins and comins. As I knowed I durſted not look into your Honner's faſe, if I had not found out my Lady, thoff ſhe was gone off the prems's in a quartir off an hour, as a man may ſay; ſo I knowed you would be glad atheart to know I had found her out: And ſo I ſend thiſs Petur Partrick, who is to haf 5 ſhillins, it being now nere 12 of the clock at nite; for he would not ſtur without a hartie drinck too beſides: And I was willing all ſhulde be ſnug likewayes at the logins befoer I ſent. 

I have munny of youre Honner's, but I thout as how if the man was payed by me beforend, he mought play trix; ſo left that to youre Honner. 

My Lady knows nothing of my being hereaway. But I thoute it beſt not to leve the plaſe, becauſe ſhe has ta•ken the logins but for a fue nites. 

If your Honner cum to the Upper Flax, I will be in ſite all the day about the Tapp-houſe or the Hethe; I have borroued an othir cote, inſtead off your Honner's liferie, and a blacke wigge; ſoe cannot be knoen by my Lady, iff as howe ſhe ſhuld ſee me: And have made as if I had the toothe-ake; ſo with my hancriffe at my mothe, the tethe which your Honner was pleſed to bett out with your honner's fyſte, and my dam'd wide mothe, as youre Honner notifys it to be, cannot be knoen to be mine. 

The tow inner letters I had from my Lady, before ſhe went off the prems's. One was to be left at Mr. Wilſon's for Miſs Howe. The next was to be for your Honner. But I knew you was not at the plaſe directed; and being afear'd of what fell out, ſo I kept them for your Honner, and ſo could not give um to you, until I ſeed you. Miſs How's I only made belief to her Ladiſhip as I carred it, and ſed as how there was nothing left for hur, as ſhee wiſhed to knoe: So here they be bothe. 

I am, may it pleſs your Honner, 

Your Honner's moſt dutiful, and, wonce more, happy ſervant,WM. SUMMERS.THE twoinnerletters, as Will. calls them, 'tis plain, were wrote for no other purpoſe, but to ſend him out of the way with them, and one of them to amuſe me. That directed to Miſs Howe is only this: 

Thurſday, June8.I Write this, my dear Miſs Howe, only for a feint, and to ſee if it will go current. I ſhall write at large very ſoon, if not miſerably prevented!!! 

CL. H.Now, Jack, will not herfeintsjuſtify mine? Does ſhe not invade my province, thinkeſt thou? And is it not now fairly come toWho ſhall moſt deceive and cheat the other?So, I thank my ſtars, we are upon a par, at laſt, as to this point—Which is a great eaſe to my conſcience, thou muſt believe. And if what Hudibras tells us is true, the dear fugitive has alſo abundance of pleaſure to come. 

Doubtleſs the pleaſure is as greatIn being cheated, as to cheat.As lookers-on find moſt delight,Who leaſt perceive the juggler's ſleight;And ſtill the leſs they underſtand,The more admire the ſleight of hand.THIS is my dear juggler's letter to me; the otherinnerletter ſent by Will. 

Thurſday, June8.Mr. Lovelace,DO not give me cauſe to dread your return. If you would not that I ſhould hate you for ever, ſend me half a line by the bearer, to aſſure me that you will not attempt to ſee me for a week to come. I cannot look you in the face without equal confuſion and indignation. The obliging me in This is but a poor atonement for your laſt night's vile behaviour. 

You may paſs this time in a journey to your uncle's;and I cannot doubt, if the Ladies of your family are as favourable to me, as you have aſſured me they are, but that you will have intereſt enough to prevail with one of them, to oblige me with her company. After your baſeneſs of laſt night, you will not wonder, that I inſiſt upon this proof of your future honour. 

If Captain Tomlinſon comes mean time, I can hear what he has to ſay, and ſend you an account of it. 

But in leſs than a week, if you ſee me, it muſt be owing to a freſh act of violence, of which you know not the conſequence. 

Send me the requeſted line, if ever you expect to have the forgiveneſs confirmed; the promiſe of which you extorted from 

The UnhappyCL. H.Now, Belford, what canſt thou ſay in behalf of this ſweet rogue of a Lady? Whatcanſtthou ſay for her? 'Tis apparent, that ſhe was fully determined upon an elopement, when ſhe wrote it: And thus would ſhe make me of party againſt myſelf, by drawing me in to give her a week's time to compleat it in: And, wickeder ſtill, ſend me upon a fool's errand to bring up one of my couſins:—When we came, to have the ſatisfaction of finding her gone off, and me expoſed for ever!—What puniſhment can be bad enough for ſuch a little villain of a Lady! 

But mind, moreover, how plauſibly ſhe accounts by this billet (ſuppoſing ſhe had no opportunity of eloping before I returned) for the reſolution of not ſeeing me for a week; and for the bread and butter expedient!—So childiſh as we thought it! 

The chariot is not come; and if it were, it is yet too ſoon for every-thing but my impatience. And as I have already taken all my meaſures, and can think of nothing but my triumph, I will reſume her violent letter, in order to ſtrengthen my reſolutions againſther. I wasbeforein too gloomy a way to proceed with it: But now the ſubject is all alive to me, and my gayer fancy, like the ſun-beams, will irradiate it, and turn the ſolemn deep green into a brighter verdure. 

When I have called upon my charmer to explain ſome parts of her letter, and to atone for others, I will ſend it, or a copy of it, to thee. 

Suffice it at preſent to tell thee, in the firſt place, thatſhe is determined never to be my wife.—To be ſure, there ought to be no compulſion in ſo material a caſe. Compulſion was her parents fault, which I have cenſured ſo ſeverely, that I ſhall hardly be guilty of the ſame. And I am glad I know her mind as to this eſſential point. 

I haveruinedher, ſhe ſays!—Now that's a fib, take it in her own way:—If I had, ſhe would not perhaps have run away from me. 

She isthrown upon the wide world:Now I own, that Hampſtead-Heath affords very pretty, and veryextenſiveproſpects; but 'tis not thewide worldneither: And ſuppoſethatto be her grievance, I hope ſoon to reſtore her to anarrower. 

I am theenemy of her ſoul, as well as of her honour!—Confoundedly ſevere! Nevertheleſs, another fib!—For I love her ſoul very well; but think no more of it in this caſe than of my own. 

She is to bethrown upon ſtrangers!—And is not that her own fault?—Much againſt my will, I am ſure! 

She is caſt from a ſtate ofindependency into one of obligation.She never was in a ſtate ofindependency; nor is it fit a woman ſhould, of any age, or in any ſtate of life. And as to the ſtate of obligation, there is no ſuch thing as living without being beholden to ſomebody. Mutual obligation is the very eſſence and ſoul of the ſocial and commercial life:—Why ſhouldſhebe exempt from it?—I am ſure the perſon ſhe ravesat, deſires not ſuch an exemption;—has been longdependentupon her, and would rejoice to owefurther obligationsto her, than he can boaſt of hitherto. 

She talks of herfather's curſe:—But have I not repaid him for it an hundred-fold, in the ſame coin? But why muſt the faults of other people be laid at my door? Have I not enow of my own? 

But the grey-eyed dawn begins to peep—Let me ſum up all. 

In ſhort, then, the dear creature's letter is a collection of invectives not very new tome; though the occaſion for them, no doubt, is new toher.A little ſprinkling of the romantic and contradictory runs thro' it. She loves, and ſhe hates: She encourages me to purſue her, by telling me I ſafely may; and yet ſhe begs I will not: She apprehends poverty and want, yet reſolves to give away her eſtate: To gratify whom?—Why, in ſhort, thoſe who have been the cauſe of her misfortunes. And finally, tho' ſhe reſolves never to be mine, yet ſhe has ſome regrets at leaving me, becauſe of the opening proſpects of a reconciliation with her friends. 

But never did morning dawn ſo tardily as this!—The chariot not yet come neither. 

A GENTLEMAN to ſpeak with me, Dorcas?—Who can want me thus early? 

Captain Tomlinſon, ſayſt thou! Surely he muſt have travelled all night!—Early riſer as I am, how could he think to find me upthusearly? 

Let but the chariot come, and he ſhall accompany me in it to the bottom of the hill (tho' he return to town on foot; for the Captain is all obliging goodneſs), that I may hear all he has to ſay, and tell him all my mind, and loſe no time. 

Well, now am I ſatisfied, that this rebellious flight will turn to my advantage, as all cruſh'd rebellions do to the advantage of a Sovereign in poſſeſſion. 

DEAR Captain, I rejoice to ſee you: Juſt in the nick of time:—See! See! 

The roſy-finger'd morn appears,And from her mantle ſhakes her tears;The ſun ariſing, mortals chears,And drives the riſing miſts away,In promiſe of a glorious day.Excuſe me, Sir, that I ſalute you, from my favourite Bard. He that riſes with the Lark, will ſing with the Lark. Strange news ſince I ſaw you, Captain! Poor miſtaken Lady!—But you have too much goodneſs, I know, to reveal to her uncle Harlowe the errors of this capricious Beauty. It will all turn out for the beſt. You muſt accompany me part of the way. I know the delight you take in compoſing differences. But 'tis the task of the Prudent to heal the breaches made by the raſhneſs and folly of the Imprudent. 

AND now (all around me ſo ſtill, and ſo ſilent) the rattling of the chariot-wheels at a ſtreet's diſtance, do I hear!—And to this angel of a Lady I fly! 

Reward, O God of Love (the cauſe is thy own); reward thou, as it deſerves, my ſuffering perſevereance!—Succeed my endeavours to bring back to thy obedience, this charming fugitive!—Make her acknowlege her raſhneſs; repent her inſults; implore my forgiveneſs; beg to be re-inſtated in my favour, and that I will bury in oblivion the remembrance of her heinous offence againſt thee, and againſt me, thy faithful votary. 

THE chariot at the door!—I come! I come!— 

I attend you, good Captain— 

Indeed, Sir— 

Pray, Sir—Civility is not ceremony. 

And now, dreſſed like a bridegroom, my heart elated beyond that of the moſt deſiring one (attended by a footman whom my Beloved never ſaw), I am already at Hampſtead! 

END ofVOL. IV.The Remainder of this Work will be publiſhed at once; and that as ſoon as indiſpenſable avocations will permit. 

ERRATA.
VOL. III.p.20.l.8.blot outhave. 

p.54.l.8.forAriadne,readArachne. 

VOL. IV.p.48.l.11.readinſtances. 

l.25fortrue,readlaudable. 

p.49.l.6fortrue,readlaudable. 

l.21.readperſecutions. 

p.72.l.12.forperpetrate,readperpetuate. 

p.149.laſt line but one, forall owed,readallowed. 

