Clarissa: Or, the history of a young lady: comprehending the most important concerns of private life. ... Published by the editor of Pamela. ... [pt.2]Richardson, Samuel, 1689-1761.314 600dpi bitonal TIFF page images and SGML/XML encoded textUniversity of Michigan LibraryAnn Arbor, Michigan2008 September004835420T58992CW112657733K051638.002CW3312658058ECLL0447200102This keyboarded and encoded edition of the work described above is co-owned by the institutions providing financial support to the Early English Books Online Text Creation Partnership. This Phase I text is available for reuse, according to the terms ofCreative Commons 0 1.0 Universal. The text can be copied, modified, distributed and performed, even for commercial purposes, all without asking permission. 

Clarissa: Or, the history of a young lady: comprehending the most important concerns of private life. ... Published by the editor of Pamela. ...Richardson, Samuel, 1689-1761.7v.,plate : engr.music ; 12⁰.printed for S. Richardson: and sold by A. Millar: J. and Ja. Rivington: John Osborn; and by J. Leake, at Bath,London :1748.The editor of Pamela = Samuel Richardson.Vols. 3-7 bear the imprint: "London: printed for S. Richardson: and sold by John Osborn; Andrew Millar; J. and J. Rivington; and by J. Leake, at Bath", except vol. 4 has "J. and Ja. Rivington" in place of "J. and J. Rivington".Vols. 3 and 4 are found in two states: in the first state, three leaves of preface intended for vol. 3 are found between the titlepage and text of vol. 4. In the second state, the preface has been removed from vol.4 to be found between titlepage and text of vol. 3 (Sale).Vols. 5-7 were also issued as part of the 2nd. edition, 1749.Augustan Reprint Society: preface (by William Warburton) to vol. III and vol. IV only.Reproduction of original from the British Library.Sale, 32English Short Title Catalog, ESTCT58992.Electronic data. Farmington Hills, Mich. : Thomson Gale, 2003. Page image (PNG). Digitized image of the microfilm version produced in Woodbridge, CT by Research Publications, 1982-2002 (later known as Primary Source Microfilm, an imprint of the Gale Group).Created by converting TCP files to TEI P5 using tcp2tei.xsl, TEI @ Oxford. 

EEBO-TCP is a partnership between the Universities of Michigan and Oxford and the publisher ProQuest to create accurately transcribed and encoded texts based on the image sets published by ProQuest via their Early English Books Online (EEBO) database (http://eebo.chadwyck.com). The general aim of EEBO-TCP is to encode one copy (usually the first edition) of every monographic English-language title published between 1473 and 1700 available in EEBO. 

EEBO-TCP aimed to produce large quantities of textual data within the usual project restraints of time and funding, and therefore chose to create diplomatic transcriptions (as opposed to critical editions) with light-touch, mainly structural encoding based on the Text Encoding Initiative (http://www.tei-c.org). 

The EEBO-TCP project was divided into two phases. The 25,363 texts created during Phase 1 of the project have been released into the public domain as of 1 January 2015. Anyone can now take and use these texts for their own purposes, but we respectfully request that due credit and attribution is given to their original source. 

Users should be aware of the process of creating the TCP texts, and therefore of any assumptions that can be made about the data. 

Text selection was based on the New Cambridge Bibliography of English Literature (NCBEL). If an author (or for an anonymous work, the title) appears in NCBEL, then their works are eligible for inclusion. Selection was intended to range over a wide variety of subject areas, to reflect the true nature of the print record of the period. In general, first editions of a works in English were prioritized, although there are a number of works in other languages, notably Latin and Welsh, included and sometimes a second or later edition of a work was chosen if there was a compelling reason to do so. 

Image sets were sent to external keying companies for transcription and basic encoding. Quality assurance was then carried out by editorial teams in Oxford and Michigan. 5% (or 5 pages, whichever is the greater) of each text was proofread for accuracy and those which did not meet QA standards were returned to the keyers to be redone. After proofreading, the encoding was enhanced and/or corrected and characters marked as illegible were corrected where possible up to a limit of 100 instances per text. Any remaining illegibles were encoded as <gap>s. Understanding these processes should make clear that, while the overall quality of TCP data is very good, some errors will remain and some readable characters will be marked as illegible. Users should bear in mind that in all likelihood such instances will never have been looked at by a TCP editor. 

The texts were encoded and linked to page images in accordance with level 4 of the TEI in Libraries guidelines. 

Copies of the texts have been issued variously as SGML (TCP schema; ASCII text with mnemonic sdata character entities); displayable XML (TCP schema; characters represented either as UTF-8 Unicode or text strings within braces); or lossless XML (TEI P5, characters represented either as UTF-8 Unicode or TEI g elements). 

Keying and markup guidelines are available at theText Creation Partnership web site. 

engTHE HISTORY OF Miſs CLARISSA HARLOWE. VOL. II.
LETTER I. MiſsHOWE,To MiſsCLARISSA HARLOWE.
Wedneſday Night, March 22.ANGRY!—What ſhould I be angry for?—I am mightily pleaſed with your freedom, as you call it. I only wonder at your patience with me; that's all. I am ſorry I gave you the trouble of ſo long a letter upon the occaſionSee LetterXXXVII,in the preceding Volume, for the occaſion: And LettersXXXVIII, XL,in the ſame, for the freedoms Miſs Harlowe apologizes for.; notwithſtanding the pleaſure I received in reading it. 

I believe, you did not intend reſerves to me: For two reaſons, I believe you did not: Firſt, becauſe youſay,you did not: Next, becauſe you have not,as yet,been able to convinceyourſelf,how it is to bewith you; and, perſecuted as you are, how ſo to ſeparate the effects that ſpring from the two cauſes (PerſecutionandLove), as to give to each its particular due. But this I believe I hinted to you once before. And ſo will ſay no more upon that ſubject at preſent. 

Robin ſays, you had but juſt depoſited your laſt parcel when he took it: For he was there, but half an hour before, and found nothing. He had ſeen my impatience; and loiter'd about, being willing to bring me ſomething from you, if poſſible. 

My couſin Jenny Fynnett is here, and deſires to be my bedfellow to-hight. So I ſhall not have an opportunity to ſit down with that ſeriouſneſs and attention, which the ſubjects of yours require. For, ſhe is all prate, you know, and loves to ſet me a prating: Yet comes upon a very grave occaſion:—On purpoſe to procure my mamma to go with her to her grandmother Larkin, who has been long bed-ridden; and, at laſt, has taken it into her head, that ſhe is mortal; and therefore will make her will; a work ſhe was, till now, extremely averſe to; but it muſt be upon condition, that my mamma, who is her diſtant relation, will go to her, and adviſe her, as to the particulars of it: For, ſhe has a high opinion, as every one elſe has, of my mamma's judgment in all matters relating to wills, ſettlements, and ſuch-like notable affairs. 

Mrs. Larkin lives about ſeventeen miles off; and as my mamma cannot abide to lie out of her own houſe, ſhe propoſes to ſet out early in the morning, in order to get back again at night. So, to-morrow I ſhall be at your devotion from day-light to day-light; nor will I be at home to any-body. 

As to the impertinent man, I have put him upon eſcorting the two ladies, in order to attend my mamma home at night: Such expeditions as theſe, and to give our ſex a little air of vanity and aſſuredneſs at public places, is all that I know theſe dangling fellows are good for. 

I have hinted before, that I could almoſt wiſh my mamma and Mr. Hickman would make a match of it: And I here repeat my wiſhes. What ſignifies a difference of fifteen or twenty years; eſpecially when the Lady has ſpirits that will make her young a long time, and the gentleman is amightyſober man?—I think verily, I could like him better for a papa, than for a nearer relation: And they are ſtrange admirers of one another. 

But allow me a perhaps ſtill better (and, as toyears,more ſuitable and happier) diſpoſal; for themanat leaſt:—What think you, my dear, of compromizing with your friends, by rejectingbothyour men, and encouraging my parader?—If your liking of one of the two go no farther thanconditional,I believe it will do.—A rich thought, if it obtain your approbation. In this light, I ſhould have a prodigious reſpect for Mr. Hickman; more by half than I can have in the other. The vein is open'd—Shall I let it flow?—How difficult to withſtand conſtitutional foibles!— 

Hickman, is certainly a man more in your taſte, than any of thoſe who have hitherto been brought to addreſs you. He is mighty ſober! mighty grave! and all that. Then you have told me, that he is your favourite!—But that is, becauſe he is my mamma's, perhaps.—The man would certainly rejoice at the transfer: Or he muſt be a greater fool than I take him to be. 

O but your fierce lover would knock him o' the head—I forgot that!—What makes me incapable of ſeriouſneſs when I write about this Hickman?—Yet the man ſo good a ſort of man in the main?—But who is perfect? This is one of my foibles. And ſomething for you to chide me for. 

You believe me very happy in my proſpects, in relation to him: Becauſe you are ſo very unhappy in the fooliſh uſage you meet with, you are apt (as I ſuſpect) to think that tolerable which otherwiſe wouldbe far from being ſo. I dare ſay, you would not with all your grave airs, like him for yourſelf; except being addreſſed by Solmes and him, you were obliged to have one of them. I have given you a teſt; let me ſee what you'll ſay to it. 

For my own part, I confeſs to you, that I have great exceptions to Hickman.He,andwedlocknever yet once enter'd into my head at one time. Shall I give you my free thoughts of him?—Of hisbeſtand hisworſt; and that as if I were writing to one, who knows him not? I think I will. Yet it is impoſſible I ſhould do it gravely. The ſubject won't bear to be ſo treated, in my opinion. We are not come ſo far as that yet, if ever we ſhall? And to do it in another ſtrain, ill becomes my preſent real concern for you. 

HERE I was interrupted on the honeſt man's account. He has been here theſe two hours—courting my mamma for her daughter, I ſuppoſe—Yet ſhe wants no courting neither: Tis well one of us does; elſe the man would have nothing but halcyon; and be remiſs, and ſaucy of courſe. 

He was going. His horſes at the door. 

My mamma ſent for me down, pretending to want to ſay ſomething to me. 

Something ſhe ſaid when I came, that ſignify'd nothing—Evidently, for no reaſon called me, but to give me an opportunity to ſee what a fine bow he could make; and that he might wiſh me a good-night. She knows I am not over-ready to oblige him with my preſence, if I happen to be otherwiſe engag'd. I could not help an air a little upon the fretful, when I found ſhe had nothing of moment to ſay to me, and when I ſaw her end. 

She ſmiled off the viſible fretfulneſs, that the man might go away in good humour with himſelf. 

He bow'd to the ground, and would have taken my hand, his whip in the other: I did not like tobe ſo companion'd: I withdrew my hand, but touched his elbow with a motion, as if from his low bow I had ſuppoſed him falling, and would have help'd him up. A ſad ſlip, it might have been, ſaid I! 

A mad girl, ſmil'd it off my mamma! 

He was put quite out; took his horſe-bridle, ſtump'd back, back, back, bowing, till he run againſt his ſervant: I laughed; he mounted his horſe; rid away: I mounted up ſtairs, after a little lecture.—And my head is ſo filled with him, that I muſt reſume my intention; in hopes to divert you for a few moments. 

Take it then—Hisbeſt,and hisworſt,as I ſaid before. 

Hickman is a ſort of fiddling, buſy, yet to borrow a word from you,un-buſy man: Has a great deal to do, and ſeems to me to diſpatch nothing. Irreſolute, and changeable in every thing, but in teazing me with his nonſenſe; which yet, it is evident, he muſt continue upon my mamma's intereſt, more than his own hopes; for none have I given him. 

Then I have a quarrel againſt his face, though in his perſon, for a well-thriven man, tolerably genteel:—Not to his features ſo much neither—For what, as you have often obſerved, are features in a man?—But Hickman, with ſtrong lines, and big cheek and chin bones, has not the manlineſs in his aſpect, which Lovelace has with the moſt regular and agreeable features. 

Then what a ſet and formal mortal is he in ſome things!—I have not been able yet to laugh him out of his long bib and beads: Indeed, that is, becauſe my mamma thinks it becomes him; and I would not be ſo free with him, as to own I ſhouldchooſeto have him leave it off. If he did, ſo particular is the man, he would certainly, if left to himſelf, fall into a King-William-Cravat, or ſome ſuch antique chin-cuſhion, as, by the pictures of that Prince, one ſees was then the faſhion. 

As to his dreſs, in general, he cannot, indeed, becalled a ſloven, but ſometimes he is too gaudy, at other times too plain, to be uniformly elegant. And for his manners, he makes ſuch a buſtle with them, and about them, as would induce one to ſuſpect that they are more ſtrangers to him, than familiars. You, I know, lay this to his fearfulneſs of diſobliging, or offending. Indeed yourOver-doesgenerally give the offence they endeavour to avoid. 

The man, however, is honeſt: Is of family: Has a clear and good eſtate; and may one day be a Baronet, and pleaſe you. He is humane and benevolent, tolerably generous, as people ſay; and asImight ſay too, if I would accept of his bribes; which he offers in hopes of having them all back again, and thebribedinto the bargain: A method taken by all corruptors, from old Satan, to the loweſt of his ſervants.—Yet, to ſpeak in the language of a perſon I am bound to honour, he is deemed aprudentman; that is, agood manager. 

Then, I cannot ſay, that now I like any-body better, whatever I did once. 

He is no fox-hunter: Keeps a pack indeed, but prefers not his hounds to his fellow-creatures. No bad ſign for a wife, I own. Loves his horſe, but diſlikes racing in a gaming way, as well as all ſorts of gaming. Then he is ſober; modeſt; Theyſay,virtuous; in ſhort, has qualities that mothers would be fond of in a huſband for their daughters; and for which, perhaps, their daughters would be the happier could they judge as well for themſelves, as experience, poſſibly, may teachthemto judge for theirfuturedaughters. 

Nevertheleſs, to own the truth, I cannot ſay I love the man; nor ever ſhall, I believe. 

Strange! that theſe ſober fellows cannot have a decent ſprightlineſs, a modeſt aſſurance with them! Something debonnaire; which need not be ſeparated from that awe and reverence, when they addreſs awoman, which ſhould ſhew the ardor of their paſſion, rather than the ſheepiſhneſs of their nature; for who knows not, that Love delights in taming the Lyon-hearted? That thoſe of the ſex, who are moſt conſcious of their own defect, in point of courage, naturallyrequire,and thereforeasnaturallyprefer,the man who has moſt of it, as the moſt able to give them the requiſite protection? That the greater their own cowardice, as it would be called in a man, the greater is their delight in ſubjects of heroiſm? As may be obſerved in their reading; which turns upon difficulties encounter'd, battles fought, and enemies overcome, 4 or 500 by the proweſs of one ſingle hero, themoreimprobable thebetter:In ſhort, thattheirman ſhould be a hero to every one living but themſelves; and to them know no bound to his humility. A woman has ſome glory in ſubduing a heart no man living can appall; and hence too often the bravo, aſſuming the hero, and making himſelf paſs for one, ſucceeds as only a hero ſhould. 

But as for honeſt Hickman, the good man is ſogenerallymeek, as I imagine, that I know not whether I have anypreferencepaid me in his obſequiouſneſs. And then, when I rate him, he ſeems to be ſo naturally fitted for rebuke, and ſo much expects it, that I know not how to diſappoint him, whether he juſt then deſerve it, or not. I am ſure, he has puzzled me many a time when I have ſeen him look penitent for faults he has not committed, whether to pity or laugh at him. 

You and I have oftenretroſpectedthe faces and minds of grown people; that is to ſay, have formed images from their preſent appearances, outſide and in, (as far as the manners of the perſons would juſtify us in the latter) what ſort of figures they made when boys and girls. And I'll tell you the lights in which Hickman, Solmes, and Lovelace, our three heroes, have appeared to me, ſuppoſing them boys at ſchool. 

Solmes I have imagin'd to be, a little, ſordid, pilfering rogue, who would purloin from every-body, and beg every boy's bread and butter from him; while, as I have heard a reptile brag, he would in a winter-morning, ſpit upon his thumbs, and ſpread his own with it, that he might keep it all to himſelf. 

Hickman, a great over-grown, lank-hair'd, chubby boy, who would be hunch'd and punch'd by every-body; and go home, with his finger in his eye, and tell his mother. 

While Lovelace I have ſuppoſed a curl-pated villain, full of fire, fancy, and miſchief; an orchard-robber, a wall-climber, a horſe-rider without ſaddle or bridle, neck or nothing: A ſturdy rogue, in ſhort, who would kick and cuff, and do no right, and take no wrong of any-body; would get his head broke, then a plaiſter for it, or let it heal of itſelf; while he went on to do more miſchief, and if not to get, to deſerve, broken bones. And the ſame diſpoſitions have grown up with them, and diſtinguiſh the men, with no very material alteration. 

Only, that all men are monkeys more or leſs, or elſe that you and I ſhould have ſuch baboons as theſe to chooſe out of, is a mortifying thing, my dear. 

I am ſenſible, that I am not a little out of ſeaſon in treating thus ludicrouſly the ſubject I am upon, while you are ſo unhappy; and if my manner does not divert you, as my flightineſſes uſed to do, I am inexcuſable both to you, and to my own heart: Which, I do aſſure you, notwithſtanding my ſeeming levity, is, wholly in your caſe. 

As this letter is intirely whimſical, I will not ſend it until I can accompany it with ſomething more ſolid and better ſuited to your unhappy circumſtances; that is to ſay, to the preſent ſubject of our correſpondence. To-morrow, as I told you, will be wholly yours, and of conſequence, your 

ANNA HOWE'S.LETTER II. MiſsHOWE,To MiſsCLARISSA HARLOWE.
Thurſday Morn. 7 o'Clock.MY mamma and couſin are already gone off in our chariot and four, attended by their doughty 'Squire on horſeback, and he by two of his own ſervants, and one of my mamma's. They both love parade, when they go abroad, at leaſt in compliment to one another; which ſhews, that each thinks the other does. Robin is your ſervant and mine, and nobody's elſe: And the day is all my own. 

I muſt begin with blaming you, my dear, for your reſolution not to litigate for your right, if occaſion were to be given you. Juſtice is due to one's ſelf, as well as to every-body elſe. Still more muſt I blame you for declaring to your aunt and ſiſter that you willnot:Since (as they will tell it to your father and brother) the declaration muſt needs give advantages to ſpirits who have ſo little of that generoſity for which you yourſelf are ſo much diſtinguiſhed. 

There never was a ſpirit in the world that would inſult where itdared,but it would creep and cringe where it darednot.Let me remind you of a ſentence of your own, the occaſion for which I have forgotten:'That little Spirits will always accommodate themſelves to the ſubject they would work upon:—Will ſawn upon a ſturdy-temper'd perſon: Will inſult the meek:'And another given to Miſs Biddulph, upon an occaſion you cannot forget:—'If we aſſume a dignity in what we ſay and do; and take care not to diſgrace by arrogance our own aſſumption, every-body will treat us with reſpect and deference.' 

I remember that you once made an obſervation, which you ſaid, you was obliged to Mrs. Norton for, and ſhe to her father, upon an excellent preacher,who was but an indifferent liver:'That to excell in theory, and to excell in practice, generally required different talents; which not always met in the ſame perſon.'Do you, my dear (to whom theory and practice are the ſame thing, in almoſt every laudable quality) apply the obſervation to yourſelf, in this particular caſe, where Reſolution is required; and where performance of the will of the defunct is the queſtion—No more to be diſpenſed with byyou,in whoſe favour it was made, than by any-body elſe, who have only Themſelves in view, by breaking thro' it. 

I know how much you deſpiſe riches in the main: But yet it behoves you to remember, that in one inſtance you yourſelf have judged them valuable—'In that they put it into one's power tolayobligations; while the want of them puts a perſon under a neceſſity ofreceivingfavours; receiving them, perhaps from grudging and narrow ſpirits, who know not how to confer them with that grace, which gives the principal merit to a beneficent action.'—Reflect upon this, my dear, and ſee how it agrees with the declaration you have made to your aunt and ſiſter, that you would not reſume your eſtate, were you to be turned out of doors, and reduced to indigence and want. Their very fears that you will reſume, point out to you theneceſſityof reſuming, upon the treatment you meet with. 

I own, that I was much affected (at firſt reading) with your mamma's letter ſent with the patterns!—A ſtrange meaſure, however, from a mother; forſhedid not intend to inſult you; and I cannot but lament that ſo ſenſible and ſo fine a Lady ſhould ſtoop to ſo much art, as that letter is written with: And which alſo appears in ſome of the converſations you have given me an account of. See you not in her paſſiveneſs, what boiſtrous ſpirits can obtain from gentler, merely by teazing and ill-nature? 

I know the pride they have always taken in calling you an Harlowe—Clariſſa Harlowe,ſoformaland ſoſet,at every word, when they are grave, or proudly ſolemn.—Your mamma has learnt it of them—And as inmarriage,ſo inwill,has been taught to bury her own ſuperior name and family in theirs. I have often thought that the ſame ſpirit govern'd them, in this piece of affectation, and others of the like nature (asHarlowe-Place, and ſo-forth, tho' not the elder brother's or paternal ſeat) as govern'd the tyrant TudorHenryVII., who marrying Elizabeth, the Heireſs of the Houſe of York, made himſelf a title to a throne, which he would not otherwiſe have had (being but a baſe deſcendant of the Lancaſter Line); and proved a gloomy and vile huſband to her; for no other cauſe, than becauſe ſhe had laid him under obligations, which his pride would not permit him to own.—Nor would the unprincely wretch marry her till he was in poſſeſſion of the crown, that he might not be ſuppoſed to owe it to her claim. 

You have chidden me, and again will, I doubt not, for the liberties I take with ſome of your relations. But, my dear, need I tellyou,That pride inourſelvesmuſt, and for-ever will, provoke contempt, and bring down upon us abaſement fromothers?—Have we not, in the caſe of a celebrated Bard, obſerved, that thoſe who aim at more than their due, will be refuſed the honours that they may juſtly claim?—I am very loth to offend you; yet I cannot help ſpeaking ofthem,as well as ofothers,as I think they deſerve.PraiſeorDiſpraiſe,is the Reward or Puniſhment which the world confers or inflicts onMeritorDemerit; and, for my part, I neither can nor will confound them in the application. I deſpiſe them All, but your mamma: Indeed I do:—And as for her—But I will ſpare the good Lady for your ſake—And one argument, indeed, I think may be pleaded in her favour,in the preſent contention—She who has for ſo many years, and with ſuch abſolute reſignation, borne what ſhe has borne, to the ſacrifice of her own will, may think it an eaſier taſk, than another perſon can imagine it, for her daughter to give upher's.—But to think to whoſe inſtigation all this is originally owing—God forgive me; but with ſuch uſage I ſhould have been with Lovelace before now—Yet remember, my dear, that the ſtep which would not be wonder'd at from ſuch an haſty-temper'd creature as me, would be inexcuſable in ſuch a conſiderate perſon as you. 

After your mamma has been thus drawn in againſt her judgment, I am the leſs ſurpriſed, that your aunt Hervey ſhould go along with her; ſince the two ſiſters never ſeparate. I have inquired into the nature of the obligation which Mr. Hervey's indifferent conduct in his affairs has laid him under:—It is only, it ſeems, that your brother has paid off for him a mortgage upon one part of his eſtate, which the mortgagee was about to forecloſe; and taken it upon himſelf: A ſmall favour (as he has ample ſecurity in his hands) from kindred to kindred: But ſuch a one, it is plain, as has laid the whole family of the Herveys under obligation to the ungenerous lender; who has treated him, and his aunt too (as Miſs Dolly Hervey has privately complain'd) with the leſs ceremony ever ſince. 

Muſt I, my dear, call ſuch a creature yourbrother?—I believe I muſt—Becauſe he is yourfather'sſon.There is no harm, I hope, in ſaying That. 

I am concerned, that you ever wrote at all to him. It was taking too much notice of him: It was adding to his ſelf-ſignificance; and a call upon him to treat you with inſolence: A call which you might have been aſſured he would not fail to anſwer. 

But ſuch a pretty maſter as this, to run riot againſt ſuch a man as Lovelace; who had taught him to put his ſword into his ſcabbard, when he had pulled itout by accident!—Theſe in-door inſolents, who, turning themſelves into bugbears, frighten women, children, and ſervants, are generally cravens among men. Were he to come fairly croſs me, and ſay to my face ſome of the free things, which, I am told, he has ſaid of me behind my back, or that (as by your account) he has ſaid of our ſex, I would take upon myſelf to aſk him two or three queſtions; altho' he were to ſend me a challenge likewiſe. 

I repeat, You know that I will ſpeak my mind, andwriteit too. He is notmybrother. Can you ſay, he isyours?—So, for your life, if you are juſt, you can't be angry with me: For would you ſide with afalſe brotheragainſt atrue friend?A brother maynotbe a friend: But a friend will bealwaysa brother.—Mind That,as your uncleTonyſays! 

I cannot deſcend ſo low, as to take very particular notice of the epiſtles of thoſe poor ſouls, whom you calluncles.—Yet I love to divert myſelf with ſuch groteſque characters too.—But I knowthem,and loveyou; and ſo cannot make the jeſt of them, which their abſurdities call for. 

Now I have ſaid ſo much on theſetouchingtopics, (as I am but too ſenſible you will think them) I muſt add one reflection more, and ſo intitle myſelf to your correction for all at once.—It is upon the conduct of thoſe women (for you and I know more thanoneſuch) who can ſuffer themſelves to be out-bluſter'd and out-gloom'd, till they have nowillof their own; inſtead of being prevailed upon, by acts of tenderneſs and complaiſance, to befooled out of it.—I wiſh, that it does not demonſtrate too evidently, that, with ſome of the ſex, inſolent controul is a more efficacious ſubduer than kindneſs or conceſſion.—Upon my life, my dear, I have often thought, that many of us are mere babies in matrimony: Perverſe fools, when too much indulg'd and humour'd; creeping ſlaves, when treated harſhly. But ſhall it be ſaid, thatfearmakes us more gentle obligers thanlove?—Forbid it, honour! forbid it, gratitude! forbid it, juſtice! that any woman of ſenſe ſhould give occaſion to have this ſaid of her! 

Did I think you would have any manner of doubt, from the ſtyle or contents of this letter, whoſe ſaucy pen it is that has run on at this rate, I would write my name at length; ſince it comes too much from my heart to diſavow it:—But at preſent the initials ſhall ſerve; and I will go on again directly. 

A. H.LETTER III. MiſsHOWE,To MiſsCLARISSA HARLOWE.
Thurſday morn. 10 o' clock (Mar. 23).I Will poſtpone, or perhaps paſs by, ſeveral obſervations which I had to make on other parts of your letters; to acquaint you, that Mr. Hickman, when in London, found an opportunity to inquire after Mr. Lovelace's town-life and converſation. 

At the Cocoa-tree in Pall-mall he fell in with two of his intimates, the one named Belton, the other Mowbray; very free of ſpeech, and rakiſh gentlemen both: But the waiter, it ſeems, paid them great reſpect, and, on his inquiry after their characters, called them men of fortune and honour. 

They began to talk of Mr. Lovelace of their own accord; and upon ſome gentlemen in the room aſking, when they expected him in town, anſwer'd, That very day. Mr. Hickman (as they both went on praiſing Lovelace) ſaid, He had indeed heard, that Mr. Lovelace was a very fine gentleman—and was proceeding, when one of them, interrupting him, ſaid,—Only, Sir, the fineſt gentleman in the world; that's all. 

And ſo he led them on to expatiate more particularly on his qualities; which they were very fond ofdoing: But ſaid not one ſingle word in behalf of his morals—Mind thatalſo, in your uncle's ſtyle. 

Mr. Hickman ſaid, That Mr. Lovelace was very happy, as he underſtood, in the eſteem of the Ladies; and, ſmiling, to make them believe he did not think amiſs of it, that he puſh'd his good fortune as far as it would go. 

Well put, Mr. Hickman! thought I; equally grave and ſage—Thou ſeemeſt not to be a ſtranger to their dialect, as I ſuppoſe this is!—But I ſaid nothing; for I have often try'd to find out thismightyſober man of my mamma's: But hitherto have only to ſay, that he is either very moral, or very cunning. 

No doubt of it, reply'd one of them; and out came an oath, with a Who would not?—That he did as every young gentleman would— 

Very true! ſaid my mamma's puritan—But I hear he is in treaty with a fine lady— 

So he was, Mr. Belton ſaid—The d—I fetch her! (Vile brute!) for ſhe ingroſſed all his time!—But that the Lady's family ought to be—ſomething—(Mr. Hickman deſired to be excuſed repeating what,—tho' he had repeated what was worſe)—and might dearly repent their uſage of a man of his family and merit. 

Perhaps they may think him too wild a gentleman, cry'd Hickman: And theirs is, I hear, a very ſober family— 

SOBER! ſaid one of them: A good honeſt word, Dick!—Where the devil has it lain all this time?—D—me if I have heard of it in this ſenſe, ever ſince I was at college! And then, ſaid he, we bandy'd it about among twenty of us, as an obſolete— 

There's for you, my dear!—Theſe are Mr. Lovelace's companions: You'll be pleaſed to takenotice of that! 

Mr. Hickman ſaid, this put him out of countenance. 

I ſtared at him, and with ſuch a meaning in myeyes, as he knew how to take; and ſo was out of countenance again. 

Don't you remember, my dear, who it was that told a young gentleman deſigned for the gown, who own'd he was apt to be too eaſily put out of countenance, when he came among free company;'That it was a bad ſign; that it looked as if his morals were not proof; but that his good diſpoſition ſeemed rather the effect of accident and education, than of ſuch a choice as was founded upon principle?'And don't you know the leſſon the very ſame young Lady gave him,'To endeavour to ſtem and diſcountenance vice, and to glory in being an advocate in all companies for virtue;'particularly obſerving,'That it was natural for a man to ſhun, or give up, what he was aſhamed of?'Which ſhe ſhould be ſorry to think his caſe on this occaſion: Adding,'That vice was a coward, and would hide its head, when oppoſed by ſuch a virtue as had preſence of mind, and a full perſuaſion of its own rectitude, to ſupport it.'The Lady, you may remember, modeſtly put her doctrine into the mouth of a worthy preacher, Dr. Lewin, as ſhe uſes to do, when ſhe has a mind not to be thought to be what ſhe is at ſo early an age; and that it may give more weight to any-thingſhe hit upon, that might appear tolerable,was her modeſt manner of ſpeech. 

Mr. Hickman, upon the whole, profeſſed to me, upon hisſecond recovery,that he had no reaſon to think well of Mr. Lovelace's morals, from what he heard of him in town: Yet his two intimates talked of his beingmore regularthan heuſed to be:That he had made a very good reſolution;Thatof old Tom Wharton was the expreſſion, That he would nevergivea challenge, norrefuſeone; which they praiſed in him highly: That, in ſhort, he was a very brave fellow, and the charming'ſt companion in the world:And would one day make a great figure in his country; for there was nothing he was not capable of— 

I am afraid that this is too true. And this, my dear, is all that Mr. Hickman could pick up about him: And is it not enough to determine ſuch a mind as yours, if notalreadydetermined? 

Yet it muſt be ſaid too, that if there be a woman in the world that can reclaim him, it is you. And, by your account of his behaviour in the interview between you, I own I have ſome hope of him. At leaſt, This I will ſay, That all his arguments with you, then, ſeem to be juſt and right: And if youareto be his—But no more of That▪He cannot, after all, deſerve you. 

LETTER IV. MiſsHOWE,To MiſsCLARISSA HARLOWE.
Thurſday afternoon, March 23.AN unexpected viſitor has turned the courſe of my thoughts, and chang'd the ſubject I had intended to purſue. The only one for whom I would have diſpenſed with my reſolution not to ſee any-body all the dedicated day: A viſitor, whom, according to Mr. Hickman's report from the expectations of his libertine friends, I ſuppoſed to be in town.—Now, my dear, have I ſaved myſelf the trouble of telling you, That it was your too-agreeable Rake. Our ſex is ſaid to love to trade in ſurprizes: Yet have I, by my over-promptitude, ſurpriſed myſelf out of mine.—I had intended, you muſt know, to run twice the length, before I had ſuffer'd you ſo much as to gueſs who, and of which ſex, my viſitor was: But ſince you have the diſcovery at ſo cheap a rate, you are welcome to it. 

The end of his coming was, to engage my intereſt with mycharming friend; and as he was ſure, that Iknew all your mind, to acquaint him what he had to truſt to. He mentioned what had paſſed in the interview between you:—But could not be ſatisfy'd with the reſult of it, and with the little ſatisfaction he had obtained from you; the malice of your family to him increaſing, and their cruelty to you not abating.—His heart, he told me, was in tumults, for fear you ſhould be prevailed upon in favour of a man deſpiſed by every-body. He gave me freſh inſtances of indignities caſt upon himſelf by your uncles and brother; and declared, that if you ſuffered yourſelf to be forced into the arms of the man for whoſe ſake he was loaded with undeſerved abuſes, you ſhould be one of the youngeſt, as you would be one of the lovelieſt, widows in England: And that he would moreover call your brother to account for the liberties he takes with his character to every-one he meets with. 

He propoſed ſeveral ſchemes, for you to chooſe ſome one of them, in order to enable you to avoid the perſecutions you labour under: One I will mention; That you will reſume your eſtate; and if you find difficulties, that can be no otherwiſe ſurmounted, that you will, either avowedly or privately, as he had propoſed to you, accept of his aunt Lawrance's, or Lord M's, aſſiſtance to inſtate you in it. He declared, that, if you did, he would leave it abſolutely to your own pleaſure afterwards, and to the advice which your couſin Morden on his arrival ſhould give you, whether to encourage his addreſs, or not, as you ſhall be convinced of the ſincerity of the reformation which his enemies make him ſo much want. 

I had now a good opportunity to ſound him (as you wiſh'd Mr. Hickman would Lord M.), as to the continued or diminiſhed favour of the Ladies, and of his Uncle, towards you, upon their being acquainted with the animoſity of your relations to them, as well as to their kinſman. I took the opportunity; and he ſatiſfy'd me, by reading ſome paſſages of a letter he hadabout him, from Lord M, That an alliance with you, and that on the foot of your own ſingle merit, would be the moſt deſirable event to them, that could happen: And ſo far to the purpoſe of your wiſhed inquiry does his Lordſhip go, in this letter, that he aſſures him, that whatever you ſuffer in fortune from the violence of your relations, onhisaccount, he and his ſiſters will join to make it up to him. And yet the reputation of a family ſo ſplendid, would, no doubt, in a caſe of ſuch importance to the honour of both, make them prefer a general conſent. 

I told him, as you yourſelf I knew had done, that you were extremely averſe to Mr. Solmes; and that, might you be left to your own choice, it would be the Single Life. As to himſelf, I plainly ſaid, That you had great and juſt objections to him, on the ſcore of his careleſs morals: That it was ſurpriſing, that young gentlemen, who gave themſelves the liberties he was ſaid to take, ſhould preſume to think, that, whenever they took it into their heads to marry, the moſt virtuous and worthy of the ſex were to fall to their lot: That as to the Reſumption, it had been very ſtrongly urged by myſelf, and would be more; tho' you had been averſe to it hitherto: That your chief reliance and hopes were upon your couſin Morden: And that to ſuſpend or gain time, till he arrived, was, as I believed, your principal aim. 

I told him, That with regard to the miſchief he threatened, neither the act nor the menace could ſerve any end but theirs who perſecuted you; as it would give them a pretence for carrying into effect their compulſatory projects; and that with the approbation of all the world; ſince he muſt not think the public would give its voice in favour of a violent young man, of no extraordinary character as to morals, who ſhould ſeek to rob a family of eminence of a child ſo valuable; and who threatened, if he could not obtain her in preference to a man choſen by themſelves, thathe would avenge himſelf upon them All, by acts of violence. 

I added, That he was very much miſtaken, if he thought to intimidateyouby ſuch menaces: For that, tho' your diſpoſition was all ſweetneſs, yet I knew not a ſteadier temper in the world than yours; nor one more inflexible (as your friends had found, and would ſtill farther find, if they continued to give occaſion for its exertion), whenever you thought yourſelf in the right; and that you were dealt ungenerouſly with, in matters of too much moment to be indifferent about. Miſs Clariſſa Harlowe, Mr. Lovelace, let me tell you, ſaid I, timid as her foreſight and prudence may make her in ſome caſes, where ſhe apprehends dangers to thoſe ſhe loves, is above fear, in points where her honour, and the true dignity of her ſex, are concerned.—In ſhort, Sir, you muſt not think to frighten Miſs Clariſſa Harlowe into ſuch a mean or unworthy conduct, as only a weak or unſteady mind can be guilty of. 

He was ſo very far from intending to intimidate you, he ſaid, that he beſought me not to mention one word to you, of what had paſſed between us: That what he had hinted at, that carried the air of a menace, was owing to the fervor of his ſpirits, raiſed by his apprehenſions of loſing all hope of you for ever; and on a ſuppoſition, that you were to be actually forced into the arms of a man you hated: That were this to be the caſe, he muſt own, that he ſhould pay very little regard to the world, or its cenſures: Eſpecially as the menaces of ſome of your family now, and their triumph over him afterwards, would both provoke and warrant all the vengeance he could take. 

He added, that all the countries in the world were alike to him, but on your account: So that whatever he ſhould think fit to do, were you loſt tohim,he ſhould have nothing to apprehend from the Laws of this. 

I did not like the determined air he ſpoke this with: He is certainly, my dear, capable of great raſhneſs.— 

He palliated a little this fierceneſs (which by the way I warmly cenſured) by ſaying, That while you remain ſingle, he will bear all the indignities that ſhall be caſt upon him by your family. But would you throw yourſelf, if you werer ſtill farther driven, into any other protection, if not his uncle's, or that of the ladies of his family (into my mamma's, ſuppoſe); or would you go to London to private lodgings, where he would never viſit you, unleſs he had your leave; and from whence you might make your own terms with your relations; he would be intirely ſatisfy'd; and would, as he had ſaid before, wait the effect of your couſin's arrival, and your free determination, as to his own fate.—Adding, That he knew the family ſo well, and how much fixed they were upon their meaſures, as well as the abſolute dependence they made upon your temper and principles, that he could not but apprehend the worſt, while you remained in the power of their perſuaſion and menaces. 

We had a great deal of other diſcourſe: But as the reciting of the reſt would be but a repetition of many of the things that paſſed between you and him, in the interview between you in the woodhouſe, I refer myſelf to your memory on that occaſionSee Vol.I.Letterxxxvi.. 

And now, my dear, upon the whole, I think, it behoves you to make yourſelf independent: All then will fall right. This man is a violent man. I ſhould wiſh, methinks, that you ſhould not have either him or Solmes. You will find, if you get out of your brother's and ſiſter's way, what youcanor can-notdo, with regard to either. If your relations perſiſt in their fooliſh ſcheme, I think I will take his hint, and, at a proper opportunity, ſound my mamma. Mean time, let me have your clear opinion of, and reaſonings upon, the Reſumption, which I join with Lovelace in adviſing. You can but ſee how your demand will work. Todemand,is not tolitigate.But beyour reſolution what it will, do not by any means repeat, that you will not aſſert your right. If they go on to give you provocation, you may have ſufficient reaſon to change your mind: And let them expect that youwillchange it. They have not the generoſity to treat you the better for diſclaiming the power they know you have.That,I think, need not now be told you. 

I am, my deareſt friend, and will be ever, 

Your moſt affectionate and faithful ANNA HOWE.LETTER V. MiſsCLARISSA. HARLOWE,To MiſsHOWE.
Wedn. Night, March 22.ON my aunt's and ſiſter's report of my obſtinacy, my aſſembled relations have taken anunanimousreſolution (as Betty tells me it is) againſt me. This reſolution you will find ſignify'd to me in the incloſed letter from my brother, juſt now brought me. Be pleaſed to return it, when peruſed. I may have occaſion for it, in the altercations between my relations and me. 

MiſsCLARY,I AM commanded to let you know, that my father and uncles having heard your aunt Hervey's account of all that has paſſed between her and you: Having heard from your ſiſter what ſort of treatment ſhe has had from you: Having recollected all that has paſſed between your mamma and you: Having weighed all your pleas and propoſals: Having taken into conſideration their engagements with Mr. Solmes; that gentleman's patience, and great affection for you; and the little opportunity you have given yourſelf to be acquainted either with his merit, or his propoſals: Having conſidered two points more; to wit, The wounded authority ofa father; and Mr. Solmes's continual intreaties (little as you have deſerved regard from him), that you may be freed from a confinement to which he is deſirous to attribute your perverſeneſs to him (averſeneſsI ſhould have ſaid, but let it go), he being unable to account otherwiſe for ſo ſtrong a one, ſuppoſing you told truth to your mamma, when you aſſerted, that your heartwas free; and which Mr. Solmes is willing to believe, tho' no-body elſe does.—For all theſe reaſons, it is reſolved, that you ſhall go to your uncle Antony's: And you muſt accordingly prepare yourſelf ſo to do. You will have but ſhort notice of the day, for obvious reaſons. 

I will honeſtly tell you the motive for your going: It is a double one; firſt, That they may be ſure, that you ſhall not correſpond with any-body they do not like; for they find from Mrs. Howe, that, by ſome means or other, youdocorreſpond with her daughter; and, thro' her, perhaps with ſomebody elſe: And next, That you may receive the viſits of Mr. Solmes; which you have thought fit to refuſe to do here; by which means you have deprived yourſelf of the opportunity of knowingwhomandwhatyou have hitherto refuſed. 

If after one fortnight's converſation with Mr. Solmes, and after you have heard what your friends ſhall further urge in his behalf, unharden'd by clandeſtine correſpondencies, you ſhall convince them, that Virgil'samor omnibus idem(for the application of which I refer you to the Georgic, as tranſlated by Dryden) is verify'd in you, as well as in the reſt of the animal creation; and that you cannot, or will not, forego your prepoſſeſſion in favour of the moral, the virtuous, the pious Lovelace (I would pleaſe you if I could!), it will then be conſidered, whether to humour you, or to renounce you for ever. 

It is hoped, that, as youmuſtgo, you will go chearfully. Your uncle Antony will make everything at his houſe agreeable to you. But indeed hewon't promiſe, that he will not, atproper times,draw up the bridge. 

Your viſitors, beſides Mr. Solmes, will be myſelf, if you permit me that honour; your ſiſter; and, as you behave to Mr. Solmes, your aunt Hervey, and your uncle Harlowe; and yet the two latter will hardly come neither, if they think it will be to hear yourwhining vocatives.—Betty Barnes will be your attendant: And, I muſt needs tell you, Miſs, that we none of us think the worſe of the faithful maid, for your diſlike of her: Which Betty, however, who would be glad to oblige you, laments as a misfortune. 

Your anſwer is required, whether youchearfullyconſent to go? And your indulgent mamma bids me remind you from her, That a fortnight's viſits from Mr. Solmes are all that is meant at preſent. 

I am, as you ſhall be pleaſed to deſerve, 

Yours, &c. JAMES HARLOWE, jun.So here is the maſter-ſtroke of my brother's policy! Called upon to conſent to go to my uncle Antony's,avowedlyto receive Mr. Solmes's viſits!—A chapel!—A moated houſe!—Deprived of the opportunity of correſponding with you!—or of any poſſibility of eſcape, ſhould violence be uſed to compel me to be that odious man's! 

Late as it was, when I received this inſolent letter, I wrote an anſwer to it directly, that it might be ready for the writer's time of riſing. I incloſe the rough draught of it. You will ſee by it how much his vile hint from the Georgic, and his rude one of mywhining vocatives,have ſet me up. Beſides, as the command to get ready to go to my uncle's is in the name of my father and uncles, it is but to ſhew a piece of the art they accuſe me of, to reſent the vile hint, I have ſo much reaſon to reſent, in order to palliate the refuſal of obeying, what would otherwiſebe interpreted an act of rebellion by my brother and ſiſter: For, it ſeems plain to me, that they will work but half their ends, if they do not deprive me of my father's and uncles favour, altho' I ſhould even comply with terms, which it is impoſſible I ſhould ever comply with. 

YOU might have told me, Brother, in three lines, what the determination of my friends was; only, that then you would not have had room to diſplay your pedantry by ſo deteſtable an alluſion or reference to the Georgic. Give me leave to tell you, Sir, That ifhumanitywere a branch of your ſtudies at the Univerſity, it has not found a genius in you for maſtering it. Nor is either my Sex or my ſelf, tho' a ſiſter, I ſee, intitled to the leaſt decency from a brother, who has ſtudied, as it ſeems, rather to cultivate the malevolence of his natural temper, than any tendency which one would have hoped his parentage, if not his education, might have given him, to a tolerable politeneſs. 

I doubt not, that you will take amiſs my freedom: But as you have deſerved it from me, I ſhall be leſs and leſs concerned on that ſcore, as I ſee you are more and more intent to ſhew your wit at the expence of juſtice and compaſſion. 

The time is, indeed, come, that I can no longer bear thoſe contempts and reflections, which a brother, leaſt of all men, is intitled to give. And let me beg of you one favour, officious Sir:—It isthis,That you will not give yourſelf any concern about a huſband forme,till I ſhall have the forwardneſs to propoſe a wife toyou.Pardon me, Sir; but I cannot help thinking, that could I have the art toget my papaof my ſide, I ſhould have as much right to preſcribe for you, as you have for me. 

As to the communication you make me, I muſt take upon me to ſay, That altho' I will receive, asbecomes me, any of my papa's commands; yet, as this ſignification is made me by a brother, who has ſhewn of late ſo much of an unbrotherly animoſity to me (for no reaſon in the world that I know of, but that he believes he has, in me,oneſiſter too many for his intereſt) I think myſelf intitled to conclude, that ſuch a letter as you have ſent me, is all your own—And of courſe to declare, that, while I ſo think it, I will not willingly, nor even without violence, go to any place avowedly, to receive Mr. Solmes's viſits. 

I think myſelf ſo much intitled to reſent your infamous hint, and this as well for the ſake of my Sex, as for my own, that I ought to declare, as I do, that I will not receive any more of your letters, unleſs commanded to do ſo, by an authority I never will diſpute; except in a caſe, where I think myfuture,as well aspreſenthappineſs concerned—And were ſuch a caſe to happen, I am ſure my father's harſhneſs will be leſs owing to himſelf, than to you; and to the ſpecious abſurdities of your ambitious and ſelfiſh ſchemes.—Very true, Sir! 

One word more, provoked as I am, I will add: That had I been thought as really obſtinate and perverſe, as of late I am ſaid to be, I ſhould not have been ſo diſgracefully treated as I have been—Lay your hand upon your heart, Brother, and ſay, By whoſe inſtigations—And examine what I have done to deſerve to be made thus unhappy, and to be obliged to ſtyle myſelf, 

Your injured Siſter, CL. HARLOWE.When, my dear, you have read my anſwer to this letter, tell me, what you think of me?—Itſhall go!— 

LETTER VI. MiſsCLARISSA HARLOWE,To MiſsHOWE.
Thurſday Morning, Mar. 23.MY letter has ſet themallin tumults: For, it ſeems, none of them went home laſt night; and they all were deſired to be preſent to give their advice, if I ſhould refuſe compliance with a command thought ſo reaſonable as, it ſeems, this was. 

Betty tells me, That, at firſt, my father, in a rage, was for coming up to me himſelf, and for turning me out of his doors directly. Nor was he reſtrained, till it was hinted to him, that That was no doubt my wiſh, and would anſwer all my perverſe views. But the reſult was, That my brother (having really, as my mamma and aunt inſiſted, taken wrong meaſures with me) ſhould write again in a moremoderatemanner: For nobody elſe was permitted or cared to write to ſuch aready ſcribbler.And, I having declared that I would not receive any more of his letters without command from a ſuperior authority, my mamma was to give ithers:And accordingly has done ſo in the following lines, written on the ſuperſcription of his letter to me: Which letter alſo follows: Together with my reply. 

Clary Harlowe,RECEIVE and read This, with the temper that becomes your ſex, your character, your education, and your duty: And return an anſwer to it, directed to your brother. 

CHARLOTTE HARLOWE.To MiſsCLARISSA HARLOWE.
Thurſday Morning.ONCE more I write, altho' imperiouſly prohibited by a younger ſiſter. Your mamma will have me do ſo, that you may be deſtitute of all defence, if you perſiſt in yourpervicacy.Shall I be apedant,Miſs, for this word? She is willing to indulge in you the leaſt appearance of that delicacy for which ſhe once, as well as every-body elſe, admired you—Before you knew Lovelace; I cannot, however, help ſayingthat:And ſhe, and your aunt Hervey, will have it (They would fain favour you, if they could), that I may have provoked from you the anſwer they nevertheleſs own to be ſo exceedinglyunbecoming.I am now learning, you ſee, to take up the ſofter language, where you have laid it down. This then is the caſe: 

Theyintreat,theypray,theybeg,theyſupplicate—(Will either of theſe do, Miſs Clary?) That you will make no ſcruple to go to your uncle Antony's: And fairly I am to tell you, for the very purpoſe mentioned in my laſt—or, 'tis preſumable, they need notintreat, pray, beg, ſupplicate.—Thus much is promiſed to Mr. Solmes, who is your advocate, and very uneaſy, that you ſhould be under conſtraint, ſuppoſing that your diſlike to him ariſes from That▪And, if he finds you are not to be moved in his favour, when you are abſolutely freed from That you call acontroul,he will forbear thinking of you, whatever it coſts him. He loves you too well: And in this, I really think his underſtanding, which you have reflected upon, is to be queſtioned. 

Only for one fortnight, therefore, permit his viſits YourEducation(you tell me ofmine,you know ought to make you incapable of rudeneſs to any-body. He will not, I hope, be the firſt man, myſelf excepted, whom you ever treated rudely, purely becauſehe is eſteemed by us all. I am, what you have a mind to make me, Friend, Brother, or Servant—I wiſh I could be ſtillmorepolite, to ſo polite, ſo delicate, a Siſter. 

JA. HARLOWE.You muſt ſtill write tome,if you condeſcend to reply. Your mamma will not be permitted to be diſturbed with your nothing-meaning Vocatives!—Vocatives,once more, Madam Clary, repeats thepedantyour brother! 

ToJAMES HARLOWE,jun.Eſq
Thurſday, March 23.PERMIT me, my ever-dear and honoured papa and mamma, in this manner to ſurpriſe you into anaudience(preſuming This will be read to you) ſince I am deny'd the honour of writing to you directly. Let me beg of you to believe, that nothing but the moſt unconquerable diſlike could make me ſtand againſt your pleaſure. What are riches, what are ſettlements, to happineſs? Let me not thus cruelly be given up to a man my very ſoul is averſe to. Permit me to repeat, that I cannothoneſtlybe his. Had I a ſlighter notion of the matrimonial duty than I have, perhaps I might. But when I am to bear all the miſery, and That forlife; when myheartis leſs concerned in this matter, than myſoul; mytemporal,perhaps, than myfuturegood; why ſhould I be deny'd the liberty ofrefuſing?That liberty is all I aſk. 

It were eaſy for me to give way to hear Mr. Solmes talk for the mentioned fortnight, altho' it is impoſſible for me, ſay what he would, to get over my diſlike to him. But the Moated houſe, the Chapel there, and the little mercy my brother and ſiſter, who are to be there, have hitherto ſhewn me, are what Iam extremely apprehenſive of. And why does my brother ſay, my reſtraint is to be taken off (and that too at Mr. Solmes's deſire), when I am to be a ſtill cloſer priſoner than before; the Bridge threaten'd to be drawn up; and no dear papa and mamma near me, to appeal to, in the laſt reſort? 

Transfer not, I beſeech you, to a brother and ſiſter your own authority over your child—To a brother and ſiſter, who treat me with unkindneſs and reproach; and, as I have too much reaſon to apprehend, miſrepreſent my words and behaviour; or, greatly favour'd as I uſed to be, it is impoſſible I ſhould be ſunk ſo low in your opinions, as I unhappily am! 

Let but this my hard, my diſgraceful confinement be put an end to. Permit me, my dear mamma, to purſue my Needleworks in your preſence, as one of your maidens, and you ſhall be witneſs, that it is not wilfulneſs or prepoſſeſſion that governs me. Let me not, however, be put out of your own houſe. Let Mr. Solmes come and go, as my papa pleaſes: Let me but tarry or retire when he comes, as I can; and leave the reſt to Providence. 

Forgive me, Brother, that thus, with an appearance of art, I addreſs myſelf to my father and mother, to whom, I am forbid to approach, or to write. Hard it is to be reduced to ſuch a contrivance! Forgive likewiſe the plain-dealing I have uſed in the above, with the nobleneſs of a gentleman, and the gentleneſs due from a brother to a ſiſter. Altho', of late, you have given me but little room to hope for your favour or compaſſion; yet, having not deſerved to forfeiteither,I preſume to claimboth:For I am confident it is, at preſent, much in your power, altho' but my brother (my honoured parents both, I bleſs God, in being), to give peace to the greatly diſturbed mind of 

Your unhappy Siſter, CL. HARLOWE.Betty tells me, my brother has taken my letter all in pieces; and has undertaken to write ſuch an anſwer to it, as ſhall confirm thewavering—So, it is plain, that I ſhould have moved ſomebody by it, but for this hard-hearted brother; God forgive him! 

LETTER VII. MiſsCLARISSA HARLOWE,To MiſsHOWE.
Thurſday Nighty, Mar. 23.I Send you the boaſted confutation-letter, juſt now put into my hands—My brother and ſiſter, my uncle Antony and Mr. Solmes are, I underſtand, exulting over the copy of it below, as an unanſwerable performance. 

To MiſsCLARISSA HARLOWE.
ONCE again, my inflexible ſiſter, I write to you▪It is to let you know, that the pretty piece of art you found out to make me the vehicle of your whining pathetics to your father and mother, has not had the expected effect. 

I do aſſure you, that your behaviour has not been miſrepreſented: Nor need it. Your mamma, who is ſollicitous to take all opportunities of putting the favourableſt conſtructions upon all you do, has been forced, as you well know, to give you up, upon full proof: No need then of the expedient of purſuing your Needleworks in her ſight. She cannot bear your whining pranks: And it is forherſake, that you are not permitted to come into her preſence; nor will be, but upon her own terms. 

You had like to have made a ſimpleton of your aunt Hervey yeſterday: She came down from you, pleading in your favour: But when ſhe was aſked,What conceſſion ſhe had brought you to? ſhe look'd about her, and knew not what to anſwer. So your mamma, when ſurpriſed into the beginning of your cunning addreſs to her and to your papa, under my name (for I had begun to read it, little ſuſpecting ſuch aningeniousſubterfuge) and would then make me read it thro', wrung her hands, Oh! her dear child, her dear child, muſt not be ſo compelled!—But when ſhe was aſked, Whether ſhe would be willing to have for her Son-in-law, the man who bids defiance to her whole family; and who had like to have murder'd her ſon? And what conceſſions ſhe had gain'd from her beloved, to occaſion this tenderneſs? And that for one who had apparently deceived her, in aſſuring her that her heart was free? then could ſhe look about her, as her ſiſter had done before: Then was ſhe again brought to herſelf, and to a reſolution to aſſert her authority; not totransferit, witty preſumer! over the rebel who of late, has ſo ingratefully ſtruggled to throw it off. 

You ſeem, child, to have a high notion of the matrimonial duty; and I'll warrant, like the reſt of your ſex (one or two, whom I have the honour to know, excepted) that you will go to church to promiſe what you will never think of afterwards. But,ſweetchild! as yourworthymamma Norton calls you, think a little leſs of thematrimonial(at leaſt, till you come into that ſtate) and a little more of thefilial,duty. 

How can you ſay, you are to bearall the miſery,when you give ſo large a ſhare of it to your parents, to your uncles, to your aunt, to myſelf, and to your ſiſter; who all, for Eighteen years of your life, loved you ſo well? 

If of late I have not given you room to hope for my favour or compaſſion, it is becauſe of late you have not deſerved either. I know what you mean, little reflecting fool, by ſaying, it is much in mypower, altho'butyour brother (a very ſlight degree of relation with you) to give you that peace, which you can give yourſelf whenever you pleaſe. 

The liberty ofrefuſing,pretty Miſs, is deny'd you, becauſe we are all ſenſible, that the liberty ofchooſing,to every one's diſlike, muſt follow. The vile wretch you have ſet your heart upon, ſpeaks This plainly to every-body, tho' you won't. He ſays you areHis,andſhallbeHis,and he will be the death of any man who robs him of his PROPERTY. So, Miſs, we have a mind to try this point with him. My father ſuppoſing he has the right of a father in his child, is abſolutely determin'd not to be bully'd out of that right. And what muſt that child be, who prefers the Rake to a Father? 

This is the light in which this whole debate ought to be taken. Bluſh, then, Delicacy! that cannot bear the Poet'sAmor omnibus idem!—Bluſh then, Purity! Be aſhamed, Virgin modeſty! And if capable of conviction, ſurrender your whole will to the will of the honoured pair, to whom you owe your being: And beg of all your friends to forgive and forget the part you have of late acted. 

I have written a longer letter, than ever I deſigned to write to you, after the inſolent treatment and prohibition you have given me: And now I am commiſſion'd to tell you, that your friends are as weary of confining you, as you are of being confin'd. And therefore you muſt prepare yourſelf to go in a very few days, as you have been told before, to your uncle Antony's; who, notwithſtanding your apprehenſions, will draw up his bridge when he pleaſes, will ſee what company he pleaſes in his own houſe; nor will he demoliſh his chapel to cure you of your fooliſh late-commenc'd antipathy, to a place of Divine Worſhip.—The more fooliſh, as, if we intended to uſe force, we could have the ceremony paſs in your chamber as well as any where elſe. 

Prejudice againſt Mr. Solmes has evidently blinded you, and there is acharitableneceſſity to open your eyes: Since no one but you thinks the gentleman ſo contemptible in hisperſon; nor, for a plain country gentleman, who has too much ſolid ſenſe to appear like a coxcomb, juſtly blameable in hismanners.—And as to histemper,it is neceſſary you ſhould ſpeak upon fuller knowlege, than at preſent it is plain you can have of him. 

Upon the whole, it will not be amiſs, that you prepare for your ſpeedy removal, as well for the ſake of your own conveniency, as to ſhew your readineſs, inonepoint, at leaſt, to oblige your friends; one of whom you may, if you pleaſe to deſerve it, reckon, tho'buta Brother, 

JAMES HARLOWE.P. S.If you are diſpoſed to ſee Mr. Solmes, and to make ſome excuſes to him for your paſt conduct, in order to be able to meet himſomewhere elſewith the leſs concern to yourſelf for your freedoms with him; he ſhall attend you where you pleaſe. If you have a mind to read the ſettlements, before they are read to you for your ſigning, they ſhall be ſent you up—Who knows, but they will help you to ſome freſh objections?—Your heart isfreeyou know—Itmuſt—For, did you not tell your mother it was? And will thepiousClariſſa Harlowe fib to her mamma? 

I deſire no reply. The caſe requires none. Yet I will aſk you, Have you, Miſs, no more propoſals to make? 

I was ſo vexed when I came to the end of this letter (the poſtſcript to which, perhaps, might be written, after the reſt had ſeen the letter) that I took up my pen, with an intent to write to my uncle Harlowe about reſuming my own eſtate, in purſuanceof your advice: But my heart failed me, when I recollected, that I had not one friend to ſtand by or ſupport me in my claim; and that it would but the more incenſe them, without anſwering any good end. O that my couſin were but come! 

Is it not a ſad thing, beloved as I thought myſelf, ſo lately, by every one, that now I have not one perſon in the world to plead for me, to ſtand by me, or who would afford me refuge, were I to be under the neceſſity of ſeeking for it?—I, who had the vanity to think I had as many friends as I ſaw faces, and flatter'd myſelf too, that it was not altogether unmerited, becauſe I ſaw not my Maker's Image, either in man, woman, or child, high or low, rich or poor, whom, comparatively, I loved not as myſelf.—Would to heaven, my dear, that you were marry'd! Perhaps, then, you could have induc'd Mr. Hickman, upon my application, to afford me protection, till theſe ſtorms were over-blown. But then this might have involv'dhimin difficulties and dangers; and that I would not have had done for the world. 

I don't know what to do, not I!—God forgive me, but I am very impatient!—I wiſh—but I don't know what to wiſh, without a ſin!—Yet I wiſh it would pleaſe God to take me to his mercy!—I can meet with none here!—What a world is this! What is there in it deſireable? The good we hope for, ſo ſtrangely mix'd, that one knows not what to wiſh for: And one half of mankind tormenting the other, and being tormented themſelves in tormenting!—For here in this my particular caſe, my relations cannot be happy, tho' they make me unhappy!—Except my brother and ſiſter, indeed—and they ſeem to take delight in, and enjoy, the miſchief they make! 

But it is time to lay down my pen, ſince my ink runs nothing but gall. 

LETTER VIII. MiſsCLARISSA HARLOWE,To MiſsHOWE.
Friday Morning, Six o'Clock.MRS. Betty tells me, there is now nothing talked of but of my going to my uncle Antony's. She has been order'd, ſhe ſays, to get ready to attend me thither. And, upon my expreſſing my averſeneſs to go, had the confidence to ſay, That having heard me often praiſe theromantic-neſsof the place, ſhe wasaſtoniſh'd(her hands and eyes lifted up) that I ſhould ſet myſelf againſt going to a houſe ſo much inmy taſte. 

I aſked, if this was her own inſolence, or her young miſtreſs's obſervation? 

She half-aſtoniſh'd me by her anſwer; That it was hard ſhe could not ſay agoodthing, without being robbed of the merit of it. 

As the wench looked as if ſhe really thought ſhe had ſaid a good thing, without knowing the boldneſs of it, I let it paſs. But, to ſay the truth, this creature has ſurpriſed me on many occaſions with her ſmartneſs: For, ſince ſhe has been imploy'd in this controuling office, I have diſcover'd a great deal of wit in her aſſurance, which I never ſuſpected before. This ſhews, that inſolence is her talent; and that Fortune, in placing her as a ſervant to my ſiſter, has not done ſo kindly by her as Nature; for that ſhe would make a better figure as hercompanion.And, indeed, I can't help thinking ſometimes, that I myſelf was better fitted byNatureto be the ſervant ofboth,than themiſtreſsof theone,or theſiſterof theother.And within theſe few months paſt,Fortunehas acted by me, as if ſhe were of the ſame mind. 

Friday, Ten o'Clock.Going down to my Poultry-yard, juſt now, I heard my brother and ſiſter, and that Solmes laughing and triumphing together. The high Yew Hedge between us, which divides the yard from the garden, hinder'd them from ſeeing me. 

My brother, as I found, had been reading part, or the whole perhaps, of the copy of his laſt letter—Mighty prudent and conſiſtent, you'll ſay, with their views, to make me the wife of a man, from whom they conceal not, what, were I to be ſuch, it would be kind in them to endeavour to conceal, out of regard to my future peace: But I have no doubt, that they hate me heartily. 

Indeed you was up with her there, brother, ſaid my ſiſter! You need not have bid her not write to you. I'll engage, with all her wit, ſhe'll never pretend to anſwer it. 

Why, indeed, ſaid my brother, with an air of College-ſufficiency, with which he abounds, (for he thinks nobody writes like himſelf) I believe I have given her achoak-pear.What ſay you, Mr. Solmes? 

Why, Sir, ſaid he, I think it is unanſwerable. But will it not exaſperate her more againſt me? 

Never fear, Mr. Solmes, ſaid my brother, but we'll carry our point, if ſhe do not tireyouout firſt. We have gone too far in this method to recede. Her couſin Morden will ſoon be here; ſo all muſt be over, before that time, or ſhe'll be made independent of us all. 

There, Miſs Howe, is the reaſon given for their Jehu-driving! 

Mr. Solmes declar'd, that he was determin'd to perſevere while my brother gave him any hopes, and while my father ſtood firm. 

My ſiſter told my brother, that hehit me charminglyon the reaſon why I ought to converſe withMr. Solmes. But that he ſhould not be ſo ſmart upon theſex,for the faults ofthis perverſe girl. 

Some lively, and I ſuppoſe, witty anſwer, my brother return'd; for he and Mr. Solmes laugh'd outrageouſly upon it, and Bella laughing too, call'd him a naughty gentleman: But I heard no more of what they ſaid; they walking on into the garden. 

If you think, my dear, that what I have related, did not again fire me, you will find yourſelf miſtaken, when you read at this place the incloſed copy of my letter to my brother; ſtruck off, while the iron was red-hot. 

No more call me meek and gentle, I beſeech you. 

To Mr.JAMES HARLOWE.
Friday Morning.SIR,IF, notwithſtanding your prohibition, I ſhould be ſilent on occaſion of your laſt, you would perhaps conclude, that I was conſenting to go to my uncle Antony's, upon the condition you mention. My father muſt do as he pleaſes with his child. He may turn me out of his doors, if he thinks fit, or giveyouleave to do it; but, (loth as I am to ſay it) I ſhould think it very hard to be carry'd by force to any-body's houſe, when I have one ofmy ownto go to. 

Far be it from me, notwithſtanding your's and my ſiſter's provocations, to think of taking my eſtate into my own hands, without my papa's leave: But why, if I muſt not ſtay any longer here, may I not be permitted to go thither? I will engage to ſee nobody they would not have me ſee, if this favour be permitted.FavourI call it, and am ready to receive and acknowlege it as ſuch, altho' my grandfather's will has made it matter of right. 

You aſk me, in a very unbrotherly manner, in the poſtſcript to your letter, if I have not ſome new propoſalsto make. I HAVE (ſince you put the queſtion) three or four:—New onesall, I think; tho' I will be ſo bold as to ſay, that, ſubmitting the caſe to any one impartial perſon, whomyouhave not ſet againſt me, myoldones ought not to have been rejected. IthinkThis, why then ſhould I notwriteit?—Nor have you any more reaſon to ſtorm at yourſiſter,for telling it you (ſince you ſeem, in your letter, to make it your boaſt how you turned my mamma and my aunt Hervey againſt me) than I have to be angry with mybrother,for treating me as no brother ought to treat a ſiſter. 

Theſe are my new propoſals then: 

That, as above, I may not be hinder'd from going to reſide (under ſuch conditions as ſhall be preſcribed to me, which I will moſt religiouſly obſerve) at my grandfather's late houſe. I will not again in this place call itmine.I have reaſon to think it a great miſfortune, that ever it was ſo!IndeedI have! 

If this be not permitted, I deſire leave to go for a month, or for what time ſhall be thought fit, to Miſs Howe's. I dare ſay her mamma will conſent to it, if I have my papa's permiſſion to go. 

If this, neither, be allowed, and Iamto be turned out of my father's houſe, I beg I may be ſuffer'd to go to my aunt Hervey's, where I will inviolably obſerve her commands, and thoſe of my papa and mamma. 

But if this, neither, is to be granted, it is my humble requeſt, that I may be ſent to my uncle Harlowe's, inſtead of my uncle Antony's. I mean not by this any diſreſpect to my uncle Antony: But his Moat, with his Bridge threaten'd to be drawn up, and perhaps his Chapel, terrify me beyond expreſſion, notwithſtanding yourwittyridicule upon me for that apprehenſion. 

If this likewiſe be refuſed, and I muſt be carried to the Moated houſe, which uſed to be a delightful oneto me, let it be promiſed me, that I ſhall not be compelled to receive Mr. Solmes's viſits there; and then I will as chearfully go, as ever I did. 

So here, Sir, are my new propoſals. And if none of them anſwer your end, as each of them tends to the excluſion of that ungenerous perſiſter's viſits, be pleaſed to know, that there is no misfortune I will not ſubmit to, rather than yield to give my hand to the man, to whom I can allow no ſhare in my heart. 

If I write in a ſtyle different from my uſual, and different from what I wiſhed to have occaſion to write, an impartial perſon, who knew what I have accidentally, within this hour paſt, heard from your mouth, and my ſiſter's, and a third perſon's (particularly the reaſon you give for driving on at this violent rate; to wit, my couſin Morden's ſoon-expected arrival), would think, I have but too much reaſon for it. Then be pleaſed to remember, Sir, that when mywhining vocativeshave ſubjected me to ſo much ſcorn and ridicule, it is time, were it but toimitateexamples ſo excellent asyouand myſiſterſet me, that I ſhould endeavour to aſſert my character, in order to be thought leſs analien,andnearer of kin to you both,than either of you have of late ſeemed to ſuppoſe me. 

Give me leave, in order toempty my female quiverat once, to add, that I know no other reaſon you can have, for forbidding me to reply to you, after you have written what you pleaſed to me, than that you are conſcious you cannot anſwer to reaſon and to juſtice the treatment you give me. 

If it be otherwiſe, I, an un-learned, un-logical girl, younger by near a third than yourſelf, will venture (ſo aſſured am I of the juſtice of my cauſe) to put my fate upon an iſſue withyou:Withyou,Sir, who have had the advantage of an academical education; whoſe mind muſt have been ſtrengthen'd by obſervation, and learned converſation; and who, pardonmy going ſolow▪have been accuſtomed to givechoak-pearsto thoſe you vouchſafe to write againſt. 

Any impartial perſon, your late Tutor, for inſtance; or the pious and worthy Dr. Lewin, may be judge between us: And if either give it againſt me, I will promiſe to reſign to my deſtiny: Provided, if it be given againſt you, that my father will be pleaſed only to allow of my negative to the perſon ſo violently ſought to be impoſed upon me. 

I flatter myſelf, Brother, that you will the readier come into this propoſal, as you ſeem to have a high opinion of your talents for argumentation; and not alowone of the cogency of the arguments contained in your laſt letter. And as I can poſſibly have no advantage in a contention with you, if the juſtice of my cauſe affords me not any, (as you have no opinion it will) it behoves you, methinks, to ſhew to an impartial moderator, thatIam wrong, andyounot ſo. 

If this be accepted, there is a neceſſity for its being carry'd on by the pen; the facts to be ſtated, and agreed upon by both; and the deciſion to be given, according to the force of the arguments each ſhall produce in ſupport of their ſide of the queſtion: For, give me leave to ſay, I know too well themanlineſsof your temper, to offer at aperſonaldebate with you. 

If it be not accepted, I ſhall conclude, that you cannot defend your conduct towards me: And ſhall only beg of you, that, for the future, you will treat me with the reſpect due to a ſiſter from a brother, who would be thought as polite as learned. 

And now, Sir, if I have ſeem'd to ſhew ſome ſpirit, not quite foreign to the relation I have the honour to bear toyou,and to myſiſter; and which may be deem'd not altogether of a piece with that part of my character which once, it ſeems, gained me every one's love; be pleaſed to conſider towhom,and towhatit is owing; and that this part of that character was not diſpenſed with, till it ſubjected me to that ſcornand thoſe inſults, which a brother, who has beenſo tenacious of an independence,that Ivoluntarilygave up, and who has appearedſo exaltedupon it, ought not to have ſhewn toany-body,much leſs to aweakanddefenceleſsſiſter: Who is, notwithſtanding, an affectionate and reſpectful one, and would be glad to ſhew herſelf to be ſo upon all future occaſions; as ſhe has in every action of her paſt life, altho' of late ſhe has met with ſuch unkind returns. 

CL. HARLOWE.See the force and volubility, as I may ſay, of paſſion; for the letter I ſend you is my firſt draught, ſtruck off without a blot or erazure. 

Friday, Three o' Clock.AS ſoon as I had tranſcribed it, I ſent it down to my brother by Mrs. Betty. 

The wench came up ſoon after, all aghaſt, with herLord, Miſs!Whathaveyou done?—Whathaveyou written? For you have ſet them all in ajoyfuluproar! 

MY Siſter is but this moment gone from me: She came up, all in a flame, which obliged me abruptly to lay down my pen: She run to me— 

O Spirit! ſaid; ſhe tapping my neck a littletoohard. And is it come to this at laſt!— 

Do you beat me, Bella? 

Do you call this beating you? Only tapping your ſhoulderthus,ſaid ſhe; tapping again more gently—This is what we expected it would come to—You want to be independent—My papa has lived too long for you!— 

I was going to ſpeak with vehemence; but ſhe put her handkerchief before my mouth, very rudely—You have done enough with your pen, mean liſtener, as you are! But, know, that neither your independentſcheme, nor any of your viſiting ones, will be granted you. Take your courſe, perverſe one; call in your Rake to help you to anin-dependence upon your parents, and a dependence upon him!—Do ſo!—Prepare this moment—Reſolve what you will take with you!—To-morrow you go!—Depend upon it, to-morrow you go!—No longer ſhall you tarry here, watching, and creeping about to hearken to what people ſay!—'Tis determin'd, child!—You go to-morrow!—My brother would have come up to tell you ſo!—But I perſuaded him to the contrary—For I know not, what had become of you, if he had—Such a letter!—Such an inſolent, ſuch aconceitedchallenger!—O thou vain creature!—But prepare your ſelf, I ſay—To-morrow you go—My brother will accept your bold challenge; but it muſt beperſonal; and at my uncle Antony's—Or perhaps at Mr. Solmes's— 

Thus ſhe ran on, almoſt foaming with paſſion, till, quite out of patience, I ſaid, No more of your violence, Bella—Had I known in what a way you would come up, you ſhould not have found my chamber-door open!—Talk to your ſervant in this manner: Unlikeyou,as I bleſs God I am, I am nevertheleſs your ſiſter—And let me tell you, that I won't go to-morrow, nor next day, nor next day to that—except I am dragg'd away by violence. 

What! not if your papa, or your mamma commands it—Girl? ſaid ſhe; intending another word, by her pauſe, and manner, before it came out. 

Let it come tothatBella—Then I ſhall know what to ſay—But it ſhall be from either of their own mouths, if I do.—Not from yours, nor your Betty's—And ſay another word to me, in this manner, and be the conſequence what it may, I will force myſelf into their preſence; and demand what I have done to be uſed thus! 

Come along, child!—Come along, meekneſs—taking my hand, and leading me towards the door—Demand it of them now—You'll findbothyour deſpiſed parents together!—What! does your heart fail you?—[for I reſiſted being thus inſolently led, and pulled my hand from her.] 

I want not to be led, ſaid I; and ſince I can plead your invitation, I will go: And was poſting to the ſtairs, accordingly, in my paſſion—But ſhe got between me and the door, and ſhut it— 

Let me firſt, bold one, appriſe them of your viſit:—For your own ſake, let me—For my brother is with them. But yet opening it again, ſeeing me ſhrink back—Go if you will!—Why don't you go!—Why don't you go, Miſs—following me to my cloſet, whither I retired, with my heart full, and pulled the ſaſh-door after me; and could no longer hold in my tears. 

Nor would I anſwer one word to her repeated aggravations, and demands upon me to open my door (for the key was on the inſide) nor ſo much as turn my head towards her, as ſhe looked thro' the glaſs at me. And at laſt, which vex'd her to the heart, I drew the ſilk curtain, that ſhe ſhould not ſee me, and down ſhe went muttering all the way. 

Is not this uſage enough to provoke one to a raſhneſs one had never thought of committing? 

As it is but too probable, that I may be hurry'd away to my uncle's, without being able to give you previous notice of it; I beg, that as ſoon as you ſhall hear of ſuch a violence, you will ſend to the uſual place, to take back ſuch of your letters, as may not have reached my hands, or to fetch any of mine, that may be there. May you, my dear, be always happy, prays your▪ 

CL. HARLOWE.I have received your four letters. But am in ſuch a ferment, that I cannot at preſent write to them. 

LETTER IX. MiſsCLARISSA HARLOWE,To MiſsHOWE.
Friday Night, March 24.I Have a moſt provoking letter from my ſiſter.—I might have ſuppoſed, ſhe would reſent the contempt ſhe brought upon herſelf in my chamber. Her conduct, ſurely, can only be accounted for by the rage of a ſuppoſed rivalry. 

To MiſsCLARISSA HARLOWE.
I Am to tell you, That your mamma has begg'd you off for the morrow:—But that you have effectually done your buſineſs with her, as well as with every-body elſe. 

In your propoſals, and letter to your brother, you have ſhew'd yourſelf ſo ſilly, and ſo wiſe; ſo young, and ſo old; ſo gentle, and ſo obſtinate; ſo meek, and ſo violent; that never was there ſo mix'd a character. 

We all know of whom you have borrowed this new ſpirit. And yet the ſeeds of it muſt be in your heart, or it could not all at once ſhew itſelf ſo rampant. It would be doing Mr. Solmes a ſpight, to wiſh him ſuch aſhy, un-shy girl; another of your contradictory qualities—I leave you to make out what I mean by it. 

Here,Miſs, your mamma will not let you remain: She cannot have any peace of mind while ſuch a rebel of a child is ſo near her: Your aunt Hervey will not take a charge all the family put together cannot manage: Your uncle Harlowe will not ſee you at his houſe till you are marry'd: So, thanks to your own ſtubbornneſs, you have nobody that will receive you but your uncle Antony: Thither yon muſt go in a very few days, and when there, your brother will ſettle with you, in my preſence, all that relates toyour modeſt challenge:—For it is accepted, I will aſſure you. Dr. Lewin will poſſibly be there, ſince you make choice of him;Anothergentleman likewiſe, were it but to convince you, that he is another ſort of man than you have taken him to be: Your two uncles willpoſſiblybe there too, to ſee that thepoor, weak,anddefenceleſs ſiſterhas fair play. So, you ſee, Miſs, what company your ſmart challenge will draw together. 

Prepare for the day. You'll ſoon be called upon. 

Adieu, mamma Norton's ſweet child! 

ARAB. HARLOWE.I tranſcrib'd this letter, and ſent it to my mamma, with theſe lines. 

A very few words, my ever-honour'd Mamma!IF my ſiſter wrote the incloſed by my father's direction, or yours, I muſt ſubmit to the uſage, with thisonlyobſervation, That it is ſhort of the perſonal treatment I have received from her. If it be of her own head:—Why then, Madam—But Iknew,that when I was baniſh'd from your preſence—Yet, till I know, if ſhe has or has not authority for this uſage, I will only write further, that I am 

Yourveryunhappy Child,CL. HARLOWE.This anſwer I receiv'd in an open ſlip of paper, but it was wet in one place. I kiſs'd the place; for I am ſure it was bliſter'd, as I may ſay, with a mother's tear!—The dear Lady muſt (Ihopeſhe muſt) have wrote it reluctantly. 

TO apply for protection, where authority is defy'd, is bold!—Your ſiſter, who would not inyourcircumſtances have been guilty ofyourperverſeneſs, may, allowably, be angry at you for it.—However,we have told her to moderate herzealfor our inſulted authority. See, if you can deſerve another behaviour, than That which cannot be ſo grievous toyou,as thecauſeof it is, to 

Yourmoreunhappy Mother.How often must I forbid you any addreſs to me! 

GIVE me, my deareſt friend, your opinion, what Ican,what Ioughtto do. Not what you would do (puſh'd as I am puſh'd) inreſentmentorpaſſion—for inThatſpirit you tell me, you ſhould have been with ſomebody before now.—And ſteps made in paſſion, hardly ever fail of leading to repentance: But acquaint me with what you think cool judgment, and after-reflection, whatever be the event, will juſtify. 

I doubt not yourſympathizinglove: But yet you cannot poſſibly feel indignity and perſecution ſo very ſenſibly as the immediate ſufferer feels them: Arefittertherefore to adviſe me, than I am myſelf. 

I will here reſt my cauſe. Have I, or have I not, ſuffer'd or borne enough? And if they will ſtill perſevere; if that ſtrange perſiſter againſt an antipathy ſo ſtrongly avow'd, willſtillperſiſt, ſay, WhatcanI do?—What courſe purſue?—Shall I fly to London, and endeavour to hide myſelf from Lovelace, as well as from all my own relations, till my couſin Morden arrives? Or ſhall I embark for Leghorn in my way to my couſin? Yet, my Sex, my Youth, conſider'd, how full of danger is that!—And may not my couſin be ſet out for England, while I am getting thither?—WhatcanI do?—Tell me, tell me, my deareſt Miſs Howe; for I dare not trust myſelf!— 

Eleven o'Clock at Night.I HAVE been forced to try to compoſe my angry paſſions at my Harpſichord; having firſt ſhut cloſe my doors and windows, that I might not be heardbelow. As I was cloſing the ſhutters of the windows, the diſtant whooting of the Bird of Minerva, as from the often-viſited Woodhouſe, gave the ſubject in that charming ODE to WISDOM, which does honour to our Sex, as it was written by one of it. I made an eſſay, a week ago, to ſet the three laſt ſtanza's of it, as not unſuitable to my unhappy ſituation; and after I had re-peruſed the Ode, thoſe three were my leſſon: And, I am ſure, in the ſolemn addreſs they contain to the All-wiſe, and All-powerful Deity, my heart went with my fingers. 

I incloſe the Ode, and my Effort with it. The ſubject is ſolemn: My circumſtances are affecting; and I flatter myſelf, that I have not been quite unhappy in the performance. If it obtain your approbation, I ſhall be out of doubt: And, ſhould be ſtill more aſſured, could I hear it try'd by your voice, and by your finger. 

ODE to WISDOM,
By aLADY.I.
THE ſolitary Bird of NightThro' the thick Shades now wings his Flight▪And quits his Time-ſhook Tow'r;Where, ſhelter'd from the Blaze of Day,In Philoſophic Gloom he lay,Beneath his Ivy Bow'r.II.
With Joy I hear the ſolemn Sound,Which midnight Echoes waft around,And ſighing Gales repeat.Fav'rite of PALLAS! I attend,And, faithful to thy Summons, bendAt WISDOM's awful Seat.III.
She loves the cool, the ſilent Eve,Where no falſe Shews of Life deceive,Beneath the Lunar Ray.Here Folly drops each vain Diſguiſe,Nor ſport her gaily-colour'd Dyes,As in the Beam of Day.IV.
O PALLAS! Queen of ev'ry Art,That glads the Senſe, and mends the Heart,Bleſt Source of purer Joys!In ev'ry Form of Beauty bright,That captivates thementalSightWith Pleaſure and Surprize;V.
To thy unſpotted Shrine I bow:Attend thy modeſt Suppliant's Vow,That breathes no wild Deſires;But taught by thy unerring Rules,To ſhun the fruitleſs Wiſh of Fools,To nobler Views aſpires.VI.
Not FORTUNE's Gem, AMBITION's Plume,Nor CYTHEREA's fading Bloom,Be Objects of my Pray'r:LetAv'rice, Vanity,andPride,Thoſe envy'd glitt'ring Toys divide,The dull Rewards of Care.VII.
TomethybetterGifts impart,Each moral Beauty of the Heart,By ſtudious Thought refin'd;For WEALTH, the Smiles of glad Content,For POW'R, its ampleſt, beſt Extent,An Empire o'er my Mind.VIII.
WhenFortunedrops her gay Parade,WhenPleaſure's tranſient Roſes fade,And wither in the Tomb,Unchang'd isthyimmortal Prize;Thy ever-verdant Laurels riſeIn undecaying Bloom.IX.
ByTheeprotected, I defyThe Coxcomb's Sneer, the ſtupid LyeOf Ignorance and Spite:Alike contemn the leaden Fool,And all the pointed RidiculeOf undiſcerningWit.X.
From Envy, Hurry, Noiſe, and Strife,The dull Impertinence of Life,InthyRetreat I reſt:Purſue thee to the peaceful Groves,Where PLATO's ſacred Spirit roves,In all thy Beauties dreſt.XI.
He bad Ilyſſus' tuneful StreamConvey thy Philoſophic ThemeOf PERFECT, FAIR, and GOOD:Attentive Athens caught the Sound,And all her liſt'ning Sons aroundIn awful Silence ſtood:XII.
Reclaim'd her wild, licentious Youth,Confeſs'd the potent Voice of TRUTH,And felt its juſt Controul.ThePaſſionsceas'd their loud Alarms,AndVirtue's ſoft perſuaſive CharmsO'er all their Senſes ſtole.XIII.
ThyBreath inſpires the POET's Song,The PATRIOT's free, unbiaſs'd Tongue,The HERO's gen'rous Strife;Thineare RETIREMENT's ſilent Joys,And all the ſweet engaging TiesOf STILL, DOMESTIC Life.XIV.〈♫〉No more to fabled Names confin'd; To the Supreme all-perfect Mind, My Thoughts direct their Flight My〈♫〉Thoughts direct their Flight. Wisdom's Thy Gift & all her force From thee deriv'd E-〈♫〉•ernal Source of Intel-lectual Light. Of Intel-lectual Light. 

XV
Ofend her ſure, her ſteady Ray,To regulate my doubtful Way,Thro' Life's perplexing Road:The Miſts of Error to controul,And thro' its Gloom direct my SoulTo Happineſs and Good.XVI
Beneath Her clear diſcerning EyeThe viſionary Shadows flyOf Folly's painted Show.She ſees thro' ev'ry fair Disguiſe,That All butVIRTUE'sſolid Joys,Are Vanity and Woe.LETTER X. MiſsCLARISSA HARLOWE,To MiſsHOWE.
Friday Midnight.I Have now a calmer moment. Envy, Ambition, high and ſelfiſh Reſentment, and all the violent Paſſions, are now, moſt probably, aſleep all around me; and ſhall not my own angry ones give way to the ſilent hour, and ſubſide likewiſe?—Theyhavegiven way to it; and I have made uſe of the gentler ſpace to re-peruſe your laſt letters. I will touch upon ſome paſſages in them: And that I may the leſs endanger the but juſt-recovered calm, I will begin with what you write about Mr. Hickman. 

Give me leave to ſay, That I am ſorry you cannot yet perſuade yourſelf to think better, that is to ſay,more juſtly,of that gentleman, than your whimſical picture of him ſhews you do; or, at leaſt, than the humorouſneſs of your natural vein would make onethinkyou do. 

I do not imagine, that you yourſelf will ſay, he ſat for the picture you have drawn. And yet, upon the whole, it is not greatly to his diſadvantage. Were I at eaſe in my mind, I would venture to draw a much more amiable and juſt likeneſs. 

If Mr. Hickman has not that aſſurance which ſome men have, he has that humanity and gentleneſs, which many want: And which, with the infinite value he has for you, will make him one of the propereſt huſbands in the world for a perſon of your vivacity and ſpirit. 

Altho' you ſay I would not like him myſelf, I do aſſure you, if Mr. Solmes were ſuch a man as Mr. Hickman, in perſon, mind, and behaviour, my friends and I had never diſagreed about him, if they would not have permitted me to live ſingle; Mr. Lovelace(having ſuch a character as he has) would have ſtood no chance with me. This I can the more boldly aver, becauſe, I plainly perceive, that of the two paſſions,LoveandFear,This man will be able to inſpire one with a much greater proportion of thelatter,than I imagine is compatible with theformer,to make a happy marriage. 

I am glad you own, that you like no one better than Mr. Hickman. In a little while, I make no doubt, you will be able, if you challenge your heart upon it, to acknowlege, that you like not any man ſo well: Eſpecially, when you come to conſider, that the very faults you find in Mr. Hickman, admirably fit him to makeyouhappy: That is to ſay, If it be neceſſary to your happineſs, that you ſhould have your own will in every thing. 

But let me add one thing: And that is this:—You have ſuch a ſprightly turn, that, with your admirable talents, you would make any man in the world, who loved you, look like a fool, except he were ſuch a one as Lovelace. 

Forgive me, my dear, for my frankneſs: And forgive me alſo, for ſo ſoon returning to ſubjects ſo immediately relative to myſelf, as thoſe I now muſt touch upon. 

You again inſiſt, ſtrengthen'd by Mr. Lovelace's opinion, upon my aſſuming my own eſtate: And I have given you room to expect, that I will conſider this ſubject more cloſely than I had done before.—I muſt however own, that the reaſons that I had to offer againſt your advice, were ſo obvious, that I thought you would have ſeen them yourſelf, and been determin'd by them, againſt your own haſtier counſel.—But ſince this has not been ſo; and that both you and Mr. Lovelace call upon me to aſſume my own eſtate, I will enter briefly into the ſubject. 

In the firſt place, let me aſk you, my dear, ſuppoſing I were inclined to follow your advice, Whomhave I to ſupport me in my demand?—My uncle Harlowe is one of my truſtees. He is againſt me. My couſin Morden is the other. He is in Italy, and may be ſet againſt me too. My brother has declar'd, that they are reſolved to carry their point before he arrives: So that, as they drive on, all will probably be decided before I could have an anſwer from him, were I to write: And, confined as I am, if the anſwer were to come in time, and they did not like it, they would keep it from me. 

In the next place, parents have great advantages in every eye over the child, if ſhe diſpute their pleaſure in the diſpoſing of her: And ſo they ought: Since out of twenty inſtances, perhaps two could not be produced, wheretheywere not in the right, thechildin the wrong. 

You would not, I am ſure, have me accept of Mr. Lovelace's offer'd aſſiſtance in ſuch a claim. If I would embrace anyotherperſon's, who elſe would care to appear for a child againſt parents, ever, till of late, ſo affectionate? But were ſuch a protector to be found, what a length of time would it take up in a courſe of litigation?—The Will and the Deeds have flaws in them, they ſay: My brother ſometimes talks of going to reſide atThe Grove:I ſuppoſe with a deſign to make ejectments neceſſary, were I to offer at aſſuming; or ſhould I marry Lovelace, in order to give him all the oppoſition and difficulty the Law would help him to give. 

Theſe caſes I have put to myſelf, for argument-ſake: But they are all out of the queſtion, altho' any-bodywereto be found who would eſpouſe my cauſe: For, I do aſſure you, I would ſooner beg my bread, than litigate for my right with my papa: Since I am convinc'd, that whether or not the parent do his duty by the child, the child cannot be exempted from doing hers to him. And to go to law with myFather,what a ſound has That? You will ſee, that I havemention'd my wiſh (as an alternative, and as a favour) to be permitted, if Imuſtbe put out of his houſe, to go thither: But not one ſtep further can I go. And you ſee how This is reſented. 

Upon the whole then, what have I to hope for, but a change in my father's reſolution? And is there any probability of that; ſuch an aſcendency as my brother and ſiſter have obtained over every-body; and ſuch an intereſt to purſue the enmity they have now openly avow'd againſt me? 

As to Mr. Lovelace's approbation of your aſſumption-ſcheme, I wonder not at it. He, very probably, penetrates the difficulties I ſhould have to bring it to effect, without his aſſiſtance. Were I to find myſelf as free as I would wiſh myſelf to be, perhaps that man would ſtand a worſe chance with me, than his vanity may permit him to imagine; notwithſtanding the pleaſure you take in raillying me on his account. How know you, but all that appears to be ſpecious and reaſonable in his offers—Such as, ſtanding his chance for my favour, after I became independent, as I may call it (by which, I mean no more, than having the liberty to refuſe a man in that Solmes, whom it hurts me but to think of as a huſband); and ſuch as his not viſiting me but by my leave; and till Mr. Morden came; and till I were ſatisfy'd of his reformation;—How know you, I ſay, that he gives not himſelf theſe airs purely to ſtand better inyourgraces as well asmine,by offering, of his own accord, conditions which he muſt needs think would be inſiſted on, were the caſe to happen? 

Then am I utterly diſpleaſed with him. To threaten as he threatens—Yet to pretend, that it is not to intimidate me; and to beg of you not to tell me, when he muſt know youwould,and no doubt muſtintendthat youſhould,is ſo meanly artful!—The man muſt think he has a frighted fool to deal with.—I, to join hands with ſuch a man of violence!—My own brotherthe man he threatens!—And Mr. Solmes!—What has Mr. Solmes done to him?—Isheto be blamed, if he thinks a perſon would make a wife worth having, to endeavour to obtain her?—Oh! that my friends would but leave me to my own way in this one point!—For have I given the man encouragement ſufficient to ground theſe threats upon? Were Mr. Solmes a man to whom I could be but indifferent, it might be found, that to have the merit of a ſufferer given him, from ſuch a flaming ſpirit, would very little anſwer the views of that flaming ſpirit.—It is my fortune to be treated as a fool by my brother: But Mr. Lovelace ſhall find—Yet I will lethimknow my mind; and then it will come with a better grace to your knowlege. 

Mean time, give me leave to tell you, that it goes againſt me, in my cooler moments, wicked as my brother is to me, to have you, my dear, who aremyſelf,as it were, write ſuch very ſevere reflections upon him, in relation to the advantage Lovelace had over him. He is not indeedyourbrother: But you write tohisſiſter, remember!—Upon my word, Miſs, you dip your pen in gall, whenever you are offended: And I am almoſt ready to queſtion, when I read ſome of your expreſſions, againſt others of my relations as well as him (altho' in my favour), whether you are ſo thoroughly warranted, byyour ownpatience, as you think yourſelf, to callotherpeople to account fortheirwarmth. Should we not be particularly careful to keep clear of the faults we cenſure?—And yet I am ſo angry at both my brother and ſiſter, that I ſhould not have taken this liberty with my dear friend, notwithſtanding I know youneverloved them, had you not made ſo light of ſo ſhocking a tranſaction, where a brother's life was at ſtake: Where his credit in the eye of the miſchievous ſex, has received a ſtill deeper wound, than heperſonallyſuſtained; and when a revival of theſame wicked reſentments (which may end more fatally) is threaten'd. 

His credit, I ſay, in the eye of themiſchievous Sex:Who is not warranted to call it ſo; when it is reckon'd among the men, ſuch an extraordinary piece of ſelf-conqueſt, as the two libertines his companions gloried, to reſolve never togivea challenge; and among whom duelling is ſo faſhionable a part of brutal bravery, that the man of temper, who is, moſtly, I believe, the truly brave man, is often at a great loſs how to behave in ſome caſes, to avoid incurring either a mortal guilt, or a general contempt. 

To inlarge a little upon this ſubject, may we not infer, That thoſe who would be guilty of throwing theſe contempts upon a man of temper, for avoiding a greater evil, know not the meaſure of true magnanimity: Nor how much nobler it is toforgive,and even how much moremanlytodeſpiſe,than toreſent.Were I a man, methinks, I ſhould have too much ſcorn for a perſon, who could wilfully do me a mean injury, to put a value upon his life, equal to what I put upon my own. What an abſurdity, Becauſe a man had done me aſmallinjury, that I ſhould put it in his power (at leaſt, to anequalriſque) to do me, and thoſe who love me, an irreparable one?—Were it not awilfulinjury, noravow'dto be ſo, there could not beroomfor reſentment. 

How willingly would I run away from myſelf, and what moſt concerns myſelf, if I could! This digreſſion brings me back again to the occaſion of it.—And That to the impatience I was in, when I ended my laſt letter; for my ſituation is not alter'd. I renew therefore my former earneſtneſs, as the new day approaches, and will bring with it perhaps new tryals, that you will (as undiveſtedly as poſſible of favour or reſentment) tell me what you would have me do:—For if I am obliged to go to my uncle Antony's,All, I doubt, will be over with me. Yet how to avoid it—That's the difficulty! 

I ſhall depoſite this the firſt thing: When you have it, loſe no time, I pray you, to adviſe (leſt it be too late 

Your ever-obliged, CL. HARLOWE.LETTER XI. MiſsHOWE,To MiſsCLARISSA HARLOWE.
Sat. March 25.WHATcanI adviſe you, my noble creature? Your merit is your crime. You can no more changeyournature, than your perſecutors cantheirs.Your diſtreſs is owing to the vaſt diſparity between you and them. What would you have of them? Do they not act in character?—And to whom? To an Alien. You are not one of them.—They have two dependencies—Upon their ownimpenetrableneſs,one (I'd give it a properer name, if I dared); the other, on the regard you have always had for yourcharacter(Have they not heretofore own'd as much?) and upon your apprehenſions fromthatof Lovelace, which would diſcredit you, ſhould you take any ſtep by his means to extricate yourſelf. Then they know, that reſentment and unperſuadableneſs are not natural to you; and that the anger they have wrought you up to, will ſubſide, as allextraordinariesſoon do; and that once marry'd, you'll make the beſt of it. 

But ſurely yourfather's eldeſt ſon and eldeſt daughter have a view to intail unhappineſs for life upon you, were you to have the man who is already more nearly related to them, than ever he can be to you, ſhould the ſhocking compulſion take place; by communicating to ſo narrow a ſoul all they know of your juſt averſion to him. 

As to that wretch's perſeverance, thoſe only, who know not the man, will wonder at it. He has not the leaſt delicacy. When-everhe ſhall marry, his view will not be for mind. How ſhould it? He hasnota mind: And does notLike ſeek its Like?—And if it finds ſomething beyond itſelf, how ſhall that be valued, which cannot be comprehended? Were you to be his, and ſhew a viſible want of tenderneſs to him; it is my opinion, he would not be much concerned at it; ſince that would leave him the more at liberty to purſue thoſe ſordid attachments which are predominant in him. I have heard you well obſerve, from your Mrs. Norton, That a perſon who has anyover-rulingpaſſion, will compound by giving up twentyſecondaryorunder-ſatisfactions, tho' more laudable ones, in order to havethatgratify'd. 

I'll give you the ſubſtance of a converſation (no fear you can be made to like him worſe than you do already) that paſſed between Sir Harry Downeton and this Solmes, but three days ago, as Sir Harry told it but yeſterday to my mamma and me. It will confirm to you that what your ſiſter's inſolent Betty reported he ſhould ſay, of governing by fear, was not of her own head. 

Sir Harry told him, he wonder'd he ſhould hope to carry you ſo much againſt your inclination, as every-body knew it would be, if he did. 

He matter'd not That, he ſaid: Coy maids made fond wives (A ſorry fellow!) It would not at all grieve him to ſee a pretty woman make wry faces, if ſhe gave him cauſe to vex her. And your eſtate, by the convenience of its ſituation, would richly pay him, for all he could bear with your ſhyneſs. 

He ſhould be ſure, after a while, of your complaiſance, at leaſt, if not of your love: And in That ſhould be happier than nine parts in ten of his marry'd acquaintance. 

What a wretch is this! 

For the reſt, your known virtue would be as great a ſecurity to him, as he could wiſh for. 

She will look upon you, ſaid Sir Harry (who is a reader), if ſhe be forced to marry you, as Elizabeth of France did upon Philip II. of Spain, when he received her on his frontiers, as her huſband, whowasto have been but her father-in-law: That is, with fear and terror, rather than with complaiſance and love: And you will, perhaps, be as ſurly to her, as That old Monarch was tohisbride. 

Terror and Fear, the wretch, the horrid wretch, ſaid, looked pretty in a bride, as well as in a wife: And, laughing (yes, my dear, the hideous fellow laughed immoderately, as Sir Harry told us, when he ſaid it), It ſhould be his care, to perpetuate the occaſion for thatfear,if he could not think he had thelove.And, for his part, he was of opinion, that if LOVE and FEAR muſt be ſeparated in matrimony, the man who made himſelffeared,fared beſt! 

If my eyes would carry with them the execution which the eyes of the Baſiliſk are ſaid to do, I would make it my firſt buſineſs to ſee this creature. 

My mamma, however, ſays, it would be a prodigious merit in you, if you could get over your averſion to him. Where, aſks ſhe, as you have been aſk'd before, is the praiſe-worthineſs of obedience, if it be only paid in inſtances where we give up nothing? 

What a fatality, that you have no better an option!—Either aScyllaor aCharybdis! 

Were it not YOU, I ſhould know how (barbarouſly uſed, as you are uſed) to adviſe you in a moment. But ſuch a noble character to ſuffer from a (ſuppoſed) raſhneſs and indiſcretion of ſuch a nature, would be a wound to the Sex, as I have heretofore obſerved. 

While I was in hope, that the aſſerting of your own independence would have helped you, I was pleaſed, that you hadonereſource, as I thought: Butnow, that you have ſo well proved, that ſuch a ſtep would not avail you, I am intirely at a loſs what to ſay. I will lay down my pen, and think. 

I HAVE conſidered, and conſidered again; but, I proteſt, I know no more what to ſay, than before. Only this: That I am young, like yourſelf; and have a much weaker judgment, and ſtronger paſſions, than you have. 

I have heretofore ſaid, that you have offer'd as much as you ought to offer in living ſingle. If you Were never to marry, the eſtate they are ſo loth ſhould go out of their name, would, in time, I ſuppoſe, revert to your brother: Andheorhiswould have it, perhaps, much more certainly this way, than by the precarious reverſions Solmes makes them hope for. Have you put this into their odd heads, my dear?—The tyrant word AUTHORITY, as they uſe it, can be the only objection againſt this offer. 

One thing you muſt conſider, that, if you leave your parents, your duty and love to them will not ſuffer you to appeal againſt them, to juſtify yourſelf for ſo doing; and ſo you'll have the world againſt you. And ſhould Lovelace continue his wild life, and behave ungratefully to you, how will That juſtify their conduct toyou(which nothingelſecan), as well as their reſentments againſthim? 

May heaven direct you for the beſt! I can only ſay, that, for my own part, I would do any-thing, go any-whither, rather than be compelled to marry the man I hate; and, were he ſuch a man asSolmes,muſt always hate. Nor could I have borne, what you have borne, if from father and uncles, not from brother and ſiſter. 

My mamma will have it, that after they have try'd their utmoſt efforts to bring you into their meaſures, and find them ineffectual, they will recede. But Icannot ſay I am of her mind. She does not own, ſhe has any other authority for this, but her own conjecture. I ſhould otherwiſe have hoped, that your uncle Antony and ſhe had been in one ſecret, and that favourable to you:—Woe be to one of them at leaſt (your uncle I mean), if they ſhould be inany other! 

You muſt, if poſſible, avoid being carried to that uncle's. The man, the parſon, the chapel, your brother and ſiſter preſent!—they'll certainly there marry you to Solmes. Nor will your newly-raiſed ſpirit ſupport you in your reſiſtance on ſuch an occaſion. Your meekneſs will return; and you will have nothing for it but tears (tears deſpiſed by them all), and ineffectual appeals and lamentations:—Andtheſe,when the ceremony isprofaned,as I may ſay, you muſt ſuddenly put a ſtop to, and dry up: And endeavour to diſpoſe yourſelf to ſuch an humble frame of mind, as may induce your new-made Lord to forgive all your paſt declarations of averſion. 

In ſhort, my dear, you muſt then blandiſh him over with a confeſſion, that all your paſt behaviour was maidenly reſerve only: And it will beyourpart to convince him of the truth of his impudent ſarcaſm,That the coyeſt maids make the fondeſt wives.Thus will you begin the ſtate with a high ſenſe of obligation to hisforgiving goodneſs!And if you will not be kept to it by thatfearhe propoſes to govern by, I am much miſtaken. 

Yet, after all, I muſt leave the point undetermin'd, and only tobedetermin'd, as you find they recede from their avowed purpoſe, or reſolve to remove you to your uncle Antony's. But I muſt repeat my wiſhes, that ſomething may fall out, thatneitherof theſe men may call youhis!And may you live ſingle, my deareſt friend, till ſome man ſhall offer, that may be as worthy of you, as mancanbe. 

But yet, methinks, I would not, that you, whoare ſo admirably qualify'd to adorn the matrimonial ſtate, ſhould be always ſingle. You know I am incapable of flattery; and that I always ſpeak and write the ſincere dictates of my heart. Nor can you, from what you muſt know of your own merit (taken in a comparative light with others), doubt my ſincerity. For why ſhould a perſon who delights to find out and admire every thing that is praiſe-worthy inanother,be ſuppoſed ignorant of like perfections inherſelf,when ſhe could not ſo much admire theminanother, if ſhe had themnotherſelf? And why may not one giveherthoſe praiſes, whichſhewould give to any other, who had but half of her own excellencies?—Eſpecially when ſhe is incapable of pride and vainglory; and neither deſpiſes others for the want of her fine qualities, nor over-values herſelf upon them?—Over-values, did I ſay!—How can that be?— 

Forgive me, my beloved friend. My admiration of you (increaſed, as it is, by every letter you write) will not always be held down in ſilence; altho' in order to avoid offending you, I generally endeavour to keep it from flowing to my pen, when I write to you, or to my lips, whenever I have the happineſs to be in your company. 

I will add nothing, tho' I could an hundred things, on occaſion of your lateſt communications, but that I am, 

Your ever-affectionate and faithful, ANNA HOWE.I hope I have pleaſed you with my diſpatch. I wiſh I had been able to pleaſe you with my requeſted advice. 

You have given new beauties to the charming Ode which you have tranſmitted to me. What pity that the wretches you have to deal with, putyou out of your admirable courſe; in the purſuit of which, like the ſun, you was wont to chear and illuminate all you ſhone upon. 

LETTER XII. MiſsCLARISSA HARLOWE,To MiſsHOWE.
Sunday Morning, Mar. 26.HOW ſoothing a thing is praiſe from thoſe we love!—Whether conſcious or not, of deſerving it, it cannot but give us great delight, to ſee one's ſelf ſtand high in the opinion of thoſe whoſe favour we are ambitious to cultivate. An ingenuous mind will make this farther uſe of it, that if it be ſenſible, that it does notalreadydeſerve the charming attributes, it will haſten, before its friend finds herſelf miſtaken, to obtain the graces it is complimented for: And this it will do, as well in honour to itſelf, as to preſerve its friend's opinion, and juſtify her judgment!—May This be always my aim!—And then you will not only give thepraiſe,but themerit; and I ſhall be more worthy of that friendſhip, which is the only pleaſure I have to boaſt of. 

Moſt heartily I thank you for the kind diſpatch of your laſt favour. How much am I indebted to you! and even to your honeſt ſervant!—Under what obligations does my unhappy ſituation lay me! 

But let me anſwer the kind contents of it, as well as I may. 

As to getting over my diſguſts to Mr. Solmes, it is impoſſible to be done; while he wants Generoſity, Frankneſs of Heart, Benevolence, Manners, and every qualification that diſtinguiſhes a worthy man. O my dear! what a degree of patience, what a greatneſs of ſoul, is required in the wife, not to deſpiſe a huſband who is more ignorant, more illiterate, more low-minded, than herſelf?—The wretch, veſtedwith prerogatives, who will claim rule in virtue of them (and not topermitwhoſe claim, will be as diſgraceful to thepreſcribingwife, as to thegovern'dhuſband); How ſhall ſuch a huſband as This be borne, were he, for reaſons ofconvenienceandintereſt,even to be one's CHOICE? But, to becompelledto have ſuch a one, and that compulſion to ariſe from motives as unworthy of thepreſcribersas of thepreſcribed,who can think of getting over an averſion ſo juſtly founded? How much eaſier to bear thetemporaryperſecutions I labour under,becauſetemporary, than to reſolve to beſucha man's forlife?Were I to comply, muſt I not leave my relations, and go to him?One monthwill decide the one perhaps: But what aduration of woewill the other be!—Every day, it is likely, riſing to witneſs to ſome new breach of an Altar-vow'd duty! 

Then, my dear, the man ſeems already to be meditating vengeance upon me for an averſion I cannot help: For yeſterday, my ſaucy gaolereſs aſſured me, That all my oppoſitions would not ſignify thatpinch of ſnuff,holding out her genteel finger and thumb: That Imuſthave Mr. Solmes: That therefore, I had not beſt carry my jeſt too far; for that Mr. Solmes was a man of ſpirit, and had told HER, that as I ſhould ſurely be his, I acted very unpoliticly; ſince, if he had not moremercy(that washerword; I know not if it werehis) than I had, I might have cauſe to repent the uſage I gave him, to the laſt day of my life. 

But enough of this man; who, by what you repeat from Sir Harry Downeton, has all the inſolence of his Sex, without any one quality to make that inſolence tolerable. 

I have received two letters from Mr. Lovelace, ſince his viſit to you; which made three that I had not anſwer'd. I doubted not his being very uneaſy; but in his laſt he complains in high terms of my ſilence; not in the ſtill ſmall voice, or rather ſtyle, ofan humble Lover, but in a ſtyle like that, which would probably be uſed by a ſlighted Protector. And his pride is again touched, that like athieforevesdropper,he is forced to dodge about in hopes of a letter, and return five miles, and then to an inconvenient lodging, without any. 

His letters, and the copy of mine to him, ſhall ſoon attend you: Till when, I will give you the ſubſtance of what I wrote to him yeſterday. 

I take him ſeverely to taſk, for his freedom in threatening me, thro' you, with a viſit to Mr. Solmes, or to my brother. I ſay,'That, ſurely, I muſt be thought to be a creature fit to bearany-thing:That violence and menaces from ſome of myown familyare not enough for me to bear, in order to make me avoidhim; but that I muſt have them fromhimtoo, upon a ſuppoſition that I will oblige thoſe, whom it is both myinclinationanddutyto oblige in every-thing that is reaſonable, and in my power. 

'Very extraordinary, I tell him, that a violent ſpirit ſhall threaten to do a raſh and unjuſtifiable thing, which concernsmebut little, and himſelf a great deal, if I do not ſomethingasraſh, my character and ſex conſider'd, to divert him from it.' 

'I even hint, that, however it may affect me, if any miſchief ſhall be done on my account, yet there are perſons, as far as I know, who, in my caſe, would not think there would be reaſon formuchregret, were ſuch a committed raſhneſs as he threatens Mr. Solmes with, to rid her oftwoperſons, whom had ſhe never known, ſhe had never been unhappy.' 

This is plain-dealing, my dear! And I ſuppoſe he will put it into ſtill plainer Engliſh for me. 

I take his pride to taſk, on his diſdaining to watch for my letters; and for hiseves-droppinglanguage: And ſay,'That, ſurely, he has the leſs reaſon to think ſo hardly of his ſituation, ſince his faulty moralsare the original cauſe of all; and ſince faulty morals deſervedly level all diſtinction, and bring down rank and birth to theCanaille; and to the neceſſity, of which he complains, of appearing, if I muſt deſcend to his language, as aneves-dropperand athief.And then I ſorbid him ever to expect another letter from me, that is to ſubject him to ſuch diſgraceful hardſhips. 

'That as to the ſolemn vows and proteſtations, he is ſo ready, upon all occaſions, to make, they have the leſs weight with me, as they give a kind of demonſtration, that he himſelf thinks, from his own character, there isreaſonto make them.Deedsare to me the only evidences ofintentions.And I am more and more convinced of the neceſſity of breaking-off a correſpondence with a perſon, whoſe addreſſes I ſee it is impoſſible either to expect my friends to encourage, or him to deſerve that they ſhould. 

'What therefore I repeatedly deſire is, That ſince his birth, alliances, and expectations, are ſuch, as will at any-time, if his immoral character be not an objection, procure him, at leaſt, equal advantages, in a woman whoſe taſte and inclinations, moreover, might be better adapted to his own; I inſiſt upon it, as well as adviſe it, that he give up all thoughts of me: And the rather, as he has all along, by his threatening and unpolite behaviour to my friends, and whenever he ſpeaks of them, given me reaſon to conclude, that there is more malice tothem,than regard tome,in his perſeverance.' 

This is the ſubſtance of the letter I have written to him. 

The man, to be ſure, muſt have the penetration to obſerve, that my correſpondence with him hitherto is owing more to the ſeverity I meet with, than to a very high value for him. And ſo I would have him think. What aworſethan Moloch-deity is That,which expects an offering of reaſon, duty, and diſcretion, to be made to its ſhrine! 

Your mamma is of opinion, thatat laſtmy friends will relent. Heaven grant that they may!—But my brother and ſiſter have ſuch an influence over every-body, and are ſo determin'd; ſo pique themſelves upon ſubduing me, and carrying their point; that I deſpair that they will:—And yet, if they do not, I frankly own, I would not ſcruple to throw myſelf upon any not diſreputable protection, by which I might avoid my preſent perſecutions, on one hand, and not give Lovelace advantage over me, on the other.—That is to ſay, were there manifeſtlyno otherway left me: For, if therewere,I ſhould think the leaving my father's houſe, without his conſent, one of the moſt inexcuſable actions I could be guilty of, were the protection to be ever ſo unexceptionable; and This notwithſtanding the independent fortune willed me by my grandfather. And indeed I have often reflected with a degree of indignation and diſdain, upon the thought of what a low, ſelfiſh creature that child muſt be, who is to be rein'd-in only by what a parent can or will do for her. 

But notwithſtanding all this, I owe it to the ſincerity of friendſhip to confeſs, that I know not what Iſhouldhave done, had your advice been concluſive any way. Had you, my dear, been witneſs to my different emotions, as I read your letter, when, in one place, you adviſe me of my danger, if I am carry'd to my uncle's; in another, when you own you could not bear what I bear, and would do any thing rather than marry the man you hate: yet, in another, repreſent to me my reputation ſuffering in the world's eye; and the neceſſity I ſhould be under to juſtify my conduct, at the expence of my friends, were I to take a raſh ſtep: in another, inſinuate thediſhoneſtfigure I ſhould be forced to make, in ſo compell'd a matrimony; endeavouring to cajole, fawnupon, and play the hypocrite with a man I have an averſion to; who would have reaſon to believe me an hypocrite, as well from my former avowals, as from the ſenſe hemuſthave (if common ſenſe he has) of his own demerits:—The neceſſity you think there would be for me, the more averſe I really was, to ſeem the fonder of him: A fondneſs, were I capable of ſo much diſſimulation, that would be imputable to the moſt diſgraceful motives; as it would be too viſible, that love, either of perſon or mind, could be neither of them:—Then his undoubted, his even conſtitutional narrowneſs: His too probable jealouſy, and unforgivingneſs, bearing in mind my declared averſion, and the unfeigned deſpights I took all opportunities to do him, in order to diſcourage his addreſs: A preference avow'd againſt him from theſamemotive: with the pride he profeſſes to take in curbing, and ſinking the ſpirits of a woman he had acquired a right to tyrannize over:—Had you, I ſay, been witneſs of my different emotions as I read; now leaning This way; now That; now perplexed; now apprehenſive; now angry at one, then at another; now reſolving; now doubting,—you would have ſeen the power you have over me; and would have had reaſon to believe, that, had you given your advice in any determin'd or poſitive manner, I had been ready to have been concluded by it. So, my dear, you will find, from theſe acknowlegements, that you muſt juſtify me to thoſe Laws of Friendſhip, which require undiſguiſed frankneſs of heart; altho' your juſtification of me in that particular, will perhaps be at the expence of my prudence. 

But, upon the whole, This I do repeat—That nothing but thelaſtextremity ſhall make me abandon my father's houſe, if they will permit me to ſtay; and if I can, by any means, by any honeſt pretences, but keep off my evil deſtiny in it, till my couſin Morden arrives. As one of my truſtees,hisis a protectionthat I may, without diſcredit, throw myſelf into, if my other friends ſhould remain determin'd. And This (altho' they ſeem too well aware of it) is all my hope: For, as to Lovelace, were one to be ſure of his tenderneſs to one's-ſelf, and even of his reformation, muſt not the thoughts of embracing the offer'd protection of his family, be the ſame in the world's eye, as accepting of his own?—Could I avoid receiving his viſits at his own relations? Muſt I not be his, whatever, on ſeeing him in anearerlight, I ſhould find him out to be. For you know, it has always been my obſervation, that both ſexes too generally cheat each other, by the morediſtant.Oh! my dear! howwiſehave I endeavour'd to be! how anxious to chooſe, and to avoid every-thing, precautiouſly, as I may ſay, that might make me happy, or unhappy; yet all my wiſdom now, by a ſtrange fatality, likely to become fooliſhneſs. 

Then you tell me, in your uſual, kindly-partial manner, what is expected ofme,more than would be of ſome others. This ſhould be a leſſon to me. Whatever my motives, the world would not know them: To complain of a brother's unkindneſs,thatone might do: It is too common a caſe, where intereſts claſh: But where the unkind father cannot be ſeparated from the faulty brother; who could bear to lighten herſelf, by loading a father?—Then, in this particular caſe, muſt not the hatred Mr. Lovelace expreſſes to every-one of my family, altho' in return•ortheirhatred of him, ſhock one extremely? Muſt it not ſhew, that there is ſomething implacable, as well•s highly unpolite, in his temper?—And what creature•an think of marrying ſo as to live at continual enmity with all her own relations? 

But here, having tir'd myſelf, and I dare ſay you, will lay down my pen. 

Mr. Solmes is almoſt continually here: So is myaunt Hervey: So are my two uncles. Something is working againſt me, I doubt. What an uneaſy ſtate is ſuſpenſe!—When a naked ſword, too, ſeems hanging over one's head! 

I hear nothing but what this confident creature, Betty, throws out in the wantonneſs of office. Now it is, Why, Miſs, don't you look up your things? You'll be call'd upon, depend upon it, before you are aware!—Another time ſhe intimates darkly, and in broken ſentences, as if on purpoſe to teaze me, whatoneſays, whatanother; with their inquiries, how I diſpoſe of my time? And my brother's inſolent queſtion comes frequently in, Whether I am not writing a hiſtory of my ſufferings? 

But I am now uſed to her pertneſs: And as it is only thro' that, that I can hear of any thing intended againſt me, before it is to be put in execution; and as ſhe pleads a commiſſion, when ſhe is moſt impertinent; I bear with her: Yet, now-and-then, not without a little of the heart-burn. 

I will depoſite thus far. Adieu, my dear. 

CL. HARLOWE.Written on the Cover, after ſhe went down, with a pencil: 

On coming down, I found your ſecond letter of yeſterday's dateSee the next Letter.. I have read it; and am in hopes, that thewithinwill, in a great meaſure, anſwer your mamma's expectations of me. 

My moſt reſpectful acknowlegements to her for it, and for her very kind admonitions. 

You'll read to her what you pleaſe of the incloſed. 

LETTER XIII. MiſsHOWE,To MiſsCLARISSA HARLOWE.
Sat. Mar. 25.I Follow my laſt of this date, by command. I mentioned in my former, my mamma's opinion of the merit you would have, if you could oblige your friends, againſt your own inclination. Our conference upon this ſubject was introduced by the converſation we had had with Sir Harry Downeton; and my mamma thinks it of ſo much importance, that ſhe injoins me to give you the particulars of it. I the rather comply, as I was unable in my laſt to tell what to adviſe you to; and as you will in this recital have my mamma's opinion, at leaſt; and, perhaps, inhers,what theworld's would be, were it to know only what ſhe knows; and not ſo much as I know. 

My mamma argues upon this caſe in a moſt diſcouraging manner, for all ſuch of our ſex as look forward for happineſs in marriage with theman of their choice. 

Only, that I know, ſhe has a ſide-view to her daughter; who, at the ſame time that ſhe now prefers no one to another, values not the man her mamma moſt regards, of one farthing; or I ſhould lay it more to heart. 

What is there in it, ſays ſhe, that all this buſtle is about? Is it ſuch a mighty matter for a young Lady to give up her own inclinations to oblige her friends? 

Very well, my mamma, thought I! NOW, may you aſk this—At FORTY, you may—But what would you have ſaid at EIGHTEEN, is the queſtion! 

Either, ſaid ſhe, the Lady muſt be thought to have very violent inclinations (and what nice young creature would have That ſuppoſed?) which ſhecouldnot give up; or a very ſtubborn will, which ſhewouldnot; or, thirdly, have parents ſhe was indifferent about obliging. 

You know my mamma now and then argues very notably: always very warmly at leaſt. I happen often to differ from her; and we both think ſo well of our own arguments, that we very ſeldom are ſo happy as to convince one another. A pretty common caſe, I believe, in allvehementdebatings. She ſays, I amtoo witty; Anglicè,too pert:I, That ſhe istoo wiſe; that is to ſay, being likewiſe put into Engliſh,Not ſo young as ſhe has been:In ſhort, is grown ſo much intomother,that ſhe has forgotten ſhe ever was adaughter.So, generally, we call another cauſe by conſent—Yet fall into the old one half a dozen times over,withoutconſent:—Quitting and Reſumeing, with half-angry faces, forced into a ſmile, that there might be ſome room to piece together again: But go to bed, if bed-time, a little ſullen, nevertheleſs; or, if we ſpeak, her ſilence is broke, with an Ah! Nancy! You are ſo lively! ſo quick! I wiſh you were leſs like your papa, child!— 

I pay it off with thinking, that my mamma has no reaſon to diſclaim her ſhare in her Nancy: And if the matter go off with greater ſeverity on her ſide than I wiſh for, then her favourite Hickman fares the worſe for it, next day. 

I know I am a ſaucy creature: I know, if I do notſayſo, you willthinkſo; ſo no more of This, juſt now. What I mention it for, is to tell you, that on this ſerious occaſion, I will omit, if I can, all that paſſed between us, that had an air of flippancy on my part, or quickneſs on my mamma's, to let you into thecooland thecogent,of the converſation. 

'Look thro' the families, ſaid ſhe, which we both know, where the Gentleman and Lady have been ſaid to marry for Love; which, at the time it is ſo called, is perhaps no more than a paſſion begun in folly, or thoughtleſneſs, and carried on from aſpirit of perverſneſs and oppoſition [Here we had a parenthetical debate, which I omit;] and ſee, if they appear to be happier than thoſe whoſe principal inducement to marry, has been convenience, or to oblige their friends; or even whether they are generallyſohappy: Forconvenienceandduty,where obſerved, will afford apermanentand even anincreaſingſatisfaction, as well at the time, as upon the reflection, which ſeldom fail to reward themſelves: WhileLove,if Lovebethe motive, is an idle paſſion—[Idle inONE SENSEmy mamma cannot ſay; for Love is as buſy as a monkey, and as miſchievous as a ſchool-boy—] It is afervor,that, like all otherfervors,laſts but a little while; a bow over-ſtrained, that ſoon returns to its natural bent. 

'As it is founded generally upon merenationalexcellencies, which were unknown to the perſons themſelves, till attributed to either by the other; one, two, or three months, uſually ſets all right on both ſides; and then with open'd eyes they think of each other—juſt as every-body elſe thought of them before. 

'The loversimaginaries[Her own word! Notable enough! i'n't it?] are by that time gone off; Nature, and Old habits, painfully diſpenſed with or concealed, return: Diſguiſes thrown aſide, all the moles, freckles, and defects in the minds ofeach,diſcover themſelves; and 'tis well if each do not ſink in the opinion of the other, as much below the common ſtandard, as the blinded imagination of both had ſet them above it. And now, ſaid ſhe, the fond pair, who knew no felicity out of each other's company, are ſo far from finding the never-ending variety each had propoſed in an unreſtrained converſation with the other (when they ſeldom were together; and always parted with ſomethingto ſay; or, on recollection, when parted, wiſhing theyhadſaid); that they are continually on the wing in purſuitof amuſements out of themſelves; and thoſe, concluded my ſage mamma [Did you think her wiſdom ſoverymoderne?], will perhaps be the livelier to each, in which the other has no ſhare.' 

I told my mamma, that ifyouwere to take any raſh ſtep, it would be owing to the indiſcreet violence of your friends: I was afraid, I ſaid, that theſe reflections upon the conduct of people in the married ſtate, who might ſet out with better hopes, were but too well-grounded: But that this muſt be allowed me, that if children weighed not theſe matters ſo thoroughly as they ought, neither did parents make thoſe allowances for youth, inclination, and inexperience, which were neceſſary to be made for themſelves at their childrens time of life. 

I remember'd a letter, I told her hereupon, which you wrote a few months ago, perſonating an anonymous elderly Lady (in Mr. Wyerley's day of plaguing you) to Miſs Drayton's mamma, who, by her severity and reſtraints, had like to have driven the young Lady into the very fault, againſt which her mother was moſt ſollicitous to guard her. And, I dared to ſay, ſhe would be pleaſed with it. 

I fetched the copy of it, which you had favoured me with at the time; I would have read only that par•of it, which was moſt to my purpoſe: But ſhe would hear it allThe paſſage moſt particularly recommended by Miſs Howe, the following. 

'Permit me, Madam (ſays the perſonated grave writer) to obſerve▪That if perſons of your experience would have young people lookforward,in order to be wiſer and better by their advice, it would be kin•in them to lookbackward,and allow for their childrens youth, an•natural vivacity; in other words, for their lively hopes, unabated by time, unaccompanied by reflection, and unchecked by diſappointment. Things appear to us all in a very different light at our Entrance upon a favourite Party, or Tour; when, with golden proſpects, and high expectations, we riſe vigorous and freſh, like the ſun, beginning it•morning courſe; from what they do, when we ſit down at the End o•our views, tired, and preparing for our journey homeward: For then we take into ourreflection,what we had left out of ourſcheme,the fatigues, the checks, the hazards, we had met with; and make a true eſtimate of pleaſures, which, from our raiſed expectations, muſt neceſſarily have fallen miſerably ſhort of what we had promiſed ourſelves at ſetting out—Nothing but experience can give us a ſtrong and efficacious conviction of this difference: And when we would inculcate the fruits ofthatupon the minds of thoſe we love, who have not lived long enough to find thoſe fruits, and would hope, that ouradviceſhould have as much force uponthem,asexperiencehas uponus; and which, perhaps,ourparents advice had not uponourſelvesat our daughters time of life; ſhould we not proceed by patient reaſoning and gentleneſs, that we may not harden, where we would convince? For, Madam, the tendereſt and moſt generous minds, when harſhly treated, become generally the moſt inflexible. If the young Lady knows herheartto be right, however defective herheadmay be, for want of years and experience, ſhe will be apt to be very tenacious. And if ſhe believes her friends to be wrong, altho' perhaps they may be only ſo in their methods of treating her, how much will everyunkindcircumſtance on the parent's part, orheedleſsone on the child's, though ever ſo ſlight in itſelf, widen the difference? The parent'sprejudiceindis-favour, will confirm the daughter's in favour, of the ſame perſon; and the beſt reaſonings in the world on either ſide, will be attributed to that prejudice. In ſhort, neither of them will be convinced▪A perpetual oppoſition enſues; the parent grows impatient; the child deſperate: And, as a too natural conſequence, That falls out, which the mother was moſt afraid of, and which, poſſibly, had been prevented, had the child's paſſions been onlyled,notdriven.' 

. 

My mamma was pleaſed with the whole letter; and ſaid, It deſerved to have the effect it had. But aſked me, what excuſe could be offer'd for a young Lady capable of making ſuch reflections; and who, at her time of life, could ſo well aſſume the character of one of riper years; if ſhe ſhould ruſh into any fatal miſtake herſelf? 

She then touched upon the moral character of Mr. Lovelace; and how reaſonable the averſion of your relations is, to a man, who gives himſelf the liberties he is ſaid to take; and who, indeed, himſelf, denies not the accuſation; having been heard to declare, that he will do all the miſchief he can to the Sex, in revenge for the ill uſage and broken vows of his firſt love, at a time when he wastoo young(his own expreſſion, it ſeems) to be inſincere. 

I reply'd, That I had heard every one ſay, that that Lady really uſed him ill; that it affected him ſo much at the time, that he was forced to travel upon it; and, to drive her out of his heart, ran into courſes, which he had ingenuity enough himſelf to condemn: That, however, he had denied the menaces againſt the Sex, which were attributed to him, when charged with them by me in your preſence; and declared himſelf incapable of ſo unjuſt and ungenerous a reſentment againſtall,for the perfidy ofone. 

You remember this, my dear; as I do your innocent obſervation upon it, That you could believe his ſolemn aſſeveration and denial:'For, ſurely, ſaid you, the man who would reſent, as the higheſt indignity, that could be offer'd to a gentleman, the imputation, of awilfulfalſhood, would not be guilty of one.' 

I inſiſted upon the extraordinary circumſtances in your caſe, particularizing them: Obſerving, that Mr. Lovelace's morals were, at one time, no objection with your relations for Miſs Arabella: That then much was built upon his family, and more upon his parts and learning, which made it out of doubt, that he might be reclaim'd by a woman of virtue and prudence: And [Pray forgive me for mentioning it] I ventured to add, that altho' your family might be good ſort of folks, as the world went, yet no-body imputed to any of them, but yourſelf, a very punctilious concern for religion or piety—Therefore were they the leſs intitled to object to the defects of that kind in others. Then, what an odious man, ſaid I, have they picked out, to ſupplant, in a Lady's affections, one of the fineſt appearances of a man in England, and one noted for his brilliant parts, and other accompliſhments (whatever his morals might be); as if they were determined upon an act of power and authority, without rhyme or reaſon! 

Still my mamma inſiſted, that there was the greatermerit in your obedience on that account, and urged, that there hardly ever was a very handſome and a ſprightly man who made a good huſband: For that they were generally ſuch Narciſſus's, as to imagine every woman ought to think as highly of them, as they did of themſelves. 

There was no danger from that conſiderationhere,I ſaid, becauſe the Lady had ſtill greater advantages, both of perſon and mind, than the Man; graceful and elegant, as he muſt be allowed to be, beyond any of his ſex. 

She cannot endure to hear me praiſe any man but her favourite Hickman: Upon whom, nevertheleſs, ſhe generally brings a degree of contempt, which he would eſcape, did ſhe not leſſen the little merit he has, by giving him on all occaſions, more than I think he can deſerve, and entering him into compariſons, in which it is impoſſible but he muſt be a ſufferer. And now, prepoſterous partiality! She thought, forherpart, that Mr. Hickman, 'bating, that hisfaceindeed was not ſo ſmooth, nor his complexionquiteſo good, and ſaving that he was not ſo preſuming and ſo bold (which ought to be no fault with a modeſt woman!), equalled Mr. Lovelaceat any hour of the day. 

To avoid entering further into ſuch anincomparablecompariſon, I ſaid I did not believe, had they left you to your own way, and treated you generouſly, that you would have had the thought of encouraging any man, whom they diſliked. 

Then, Nancy, catching me up, the excuſe is leſs—For, if ſo, muſt there not be more ofcontradiction,thanlove,in the caſe? 

Not ſo, neither, Madam: For I know Miſs Clariſſa Harlowe would prefer Mr. Lovelace to all men, if morals— 

If, Nancy!—ThatIfis every-thing!—Do you really think ſhe loves Mr. Lovelace? 

What would you have had me to ſay, my dear?—I won't tell you what Ididſay—But had Inotſaid what Idid,who would have believed me? 

Beſides, Iknowyou love him!—Excuſe me, my dear: Yet, if you deny it, what do you but reflect upon yourſelf, as if you thought youought not? 

Indeed, ſaid I, the man is worthy of any woman's love (If,again, I could ſay)—But her parents, Madam— 

Her parents, Nancy—[You know, my dear, how my mamma, who accuſes her daughter of quickneſs, is evermore interrupting!—]— 

May take wrong meaſures, ſaid I— 

Cannot do wrong—They have reaſon, I'll warrant, ſaid ſhe— 

By which they may provoke a young Lady, ſaid I, to do raſh things, which otherwiſe ſee would not do. 

But if itbea raſh thing (returned ſhe), ſhould ſhe do it! A prudent daughter will not wilfully err, becauſe her parents err, if theywereto err: If ſhedo,the world, which blames the parents, will not acquit the child. All that can be ſaid, in extenuation of a daughter's error, ariſes from a kind conſideration, which Miſs's letter to Lady Drayton pleads for, to be paid toherdaughter's youth and inexperience. And will ſuch an admirable young perſon as Miſs Clariſſa Harlowe, whoſe prudence, as we ſee, qualifies her to be an adviſer of perſons much older than herſelf, take ſhelter under ſo poor a covert? 

Let her know, Nancy, out of hand, what I ſay; and I charge you to repreſent farther to her, That let her diſlike one man, and approve another, ever ſomuch, it will be expected of a young Lady of her unbounded generoſity, and greatneſs of mind, that ſhe ſhoulddeny herſelf,when ſhe canoblige all her familyby ſo doing: No leſs than ten or a dozen, perhaps, the neareſt and deareſt to her of all the perſons in theworld, an indulgent father and mother at the head of them. It may befancyonly on her ſide; but parents look deeper: And will not Miſs Clariſſa Harlowe give up herfancyto her parentsjudgment? 

I ſaid a great deal upon thisjudgment-ſubject: All that you could wiſh I ſhould ſay; and all that your extraordinary caſe allowed me to ſay. And my mamma was ſo ſenſible of the force of it, that ſhe charged me not to write to you any part of my anſwer to what ſhe ſaid; but only what ſhe herſelf had advanced; leſt, in ſo critical a caſe, it ſhould induce you to take meaſures, that might give us both reaſon (I for giving it, you for following it) to repent it as long as we lived. 

And thus, my dear, I ſet my mamma's arguments before you. And the rather, as I cannot myſelf tell what to adviſe you to do!—You know beſt your own heart; and what That will let you do! 

Robin undertakes to depoſite This very early, that you may receive it by your firſt morning airing. 

Heaven guide and direct you for the beſt, is the inceſſant prayer, of 

Your ever-affectionate, ANNA HOWE.LETTER XIV. MiſsCLARISSA HARLOWE,To MiſsHOWE.
Sunday Afternoon.I Am in great apprehenſions. Yet cannot help repeating my humble thanks to your mamma, and you, for your laſt favour. I hope her kind end is anſwer'd by the contents of my laſt. Yet I muſt not think it enough to acknowlege her goodneſs to me, with a pencil only, on the cover of a letter ſealed up. A few lines give me leave to write withregard to my anonymous letter to Lady Drayton—If I did not at that time tell you, as I believe I did, that my excellent Mrs. Norton gave me her aſſiſtance in that letter; I now acknowlege that ſhe did. 

Pray let your mamma know this, for two reaſons: One, that I may not be thought to arrogate to myſelf a diſcretion which does not belong to me; the other, that I may not ſuffer by the ſevere, but juſt inference ſhe was pleaſed to draw;doublingmy faults upon me, if I myſelf ſhould act unworthy of the advice I was ſuppoſed to give. 

Before I come to what moſt nearly affects me, I muſt chide you, once more, for the ſevere, the very ſevere things, you mention of our family, to the diſparagement of their morals, as I may ſay: Indeed, my dear, I wonder at you!—A ſlighter occaſion might have paſſed me, after I have written to you ſo often to ſo little purpoſe, on this topic. But, affecting as my own circumſtances are, I cannot, without a breach of duty, let ſlip the reflection I need not repeat in words. 

There is not a worthier perſon in England than my mamma. Nor is my papa that man you ſometimes make him. Excepting in one point, I know not any family which lives up more to their duty, than the principals of ours. A little toouncommunicativefor their great circumſtances—that is all.—Why, then, have they not reaſon to inſiſt upon unexceptionable morals in a man whoſe relationſhip to them, by a marriage in their family, they have certainly a right to allow of, or diſapprove? 

Another line or two, before I am ingroſs'd by my own concerns:—Upon your treatment of Mr. Hickman.—Is it, do you think, generous, to revenge upon an innocent perſon, the diſpleaſure you receive from another quarter, where I doubt you are a treſpaſſer too?—But one thing I can tell him; and you had not beſt provoke me to it; That no woman uſesa man ill whom ſhe does not abſolutely reject, but ſhe has it in her heart to make him amends, when her tyranny has had its run, and he has completed the meaſure of his ſervices and patience. But my mind is not enough at eaſe, to puſh this matter further. 

I will now give you the occaſion of my preſent apprehenſions. 

I had reaſon to fear, as I mention'd in mine of this morning, that a ſtorm was brewing. Mr. Solmes came home this afternoon, from church, with my brother. Soon after, Betty brought me up a letter, without ſaying from whom. It was in a cover, and directed by a hand I never ſaw before; as if it was ſuppoſed, I would not have received and open'd it, had I known it came from him. Theſe are the contents. 

To MiſsCLARISSA HARLOWE.
Sunday, Mar. 26.Deareſt Madam,I Think myſelf a moſt unhappy man, in that I have never yet been able to pay my reſpects to you with youre conſent, for one halfe hour. I have ſomething to communicate to you that concernes you much, if you be pleaſed to admitt me to youre ſpeech. Youre honour is concerned in itt, and the honour of all youre familly. Itt relates to the deſignes of one whom you are ſed to valew more then he deſerves; and to ſome of his reprobat actions; which I am reddie to give you convincing proofes of the truth of. I may appear to be intereſſed in itt: But nevertheleſſe, I am reddy to make oathe, that every tittle is true: And you will ſee what a man you are ſed to favour. But I hope not ſo, for youre owne honour. 

Pray, Madam, vouchſafe me a hearing, as you valew your honour and familly: Which will oblidge, deareſt Miſs, 

Youre moſt humble and moſt faithfull Servant, ROGER SOLMES.I waite below for the hope of admittance. 

I have no manner of doubt, that this is a poor device, to get this man into my company. I would have ſent down a verbal anſwer; but Betty refuſed to carry any meſſage, which ſhould prohibit his viſiting me. So I was obliged either to ſee him, or to write to him. I wrote, therefore, an anſwer, of which I ſhall ſend you the rough draught. And now my heart akes for what may follow from it; for I hear a great hurry below. 

ToROGER SOLMES,Eſq
SIR,WHatever you have to communicate to me, which concerns my honour, may as well be done by writing, as by word of mouth. If Mr. Lovelace is any ofmyconcern, I know not that,therefore,he ought to beyours▪For the uſage I receive onyouraccount (Imuſtthink it ſo!) is ſo harſh, that were there not ſuch a man in the world as Mr.Lovelace,I would not wiſh to ſee Mr.Solmes,no, not for one half-hour, in the way he is pleaſed to be deſirous to ſee me. I never can be in any danger from Mr. Lovelace; and, of conſequence, cannot be affected by any of your diſcoveries, if the propoſal I made be accepted. You have been acquainted with it, no doubt. If not, be pleaſed to let my friends know, that if they will ridmeof my apprehenſions of one gentleman, I will rid them oftheirsof another: And then, of what conſequence tothem,or tome,will it be, whether Mr. Lovelace be a good man, or a bad▪And, if to neither ofus,I ſee not how it can be of any toyou.But ifyoudo, I have nothing to ſay to That; and it will be a Chriſtian part, if you will expoſtulate with him upon the errors you have diſcover'd, and endeavour to make him as good a man, as, no doubt, you areyourſelf,or you would not be ſo ready to detect and expoſehim. 

Excuſe me, Sir:—But after my former letter toyou, and your ungenerous perſeverance; and after this attempt to avail yourſelf at the expence of another man's character, rather than by your own proper merit, I ſee not that you can blame any aſperity in Her, whom you have ſo largely contributed to make unhappy. 

CL. HARLOWE.Sunday night.MY father was for coming up to me, in great wrath, it ſeems; but was perſuaded to the contrary. My aunt Hervey was permitted to ſend me This that follows.—Quick work, my dear! 

To MiſsCLARISSA HARLOWE.
Niece,EVery-body is now convinc'd, that nothing is to be done with you by way of gentleneſs or perſuaſion. Your mamma will not let you ſtay in the houſe; for your papa is ſo incenſed by your ſtrange letter to his friend, that ſhe knows not what will be the conſequence, if you do. So, you are commanded to get ready to go to your uncle Antony's, out of hand. 

Your uncle thinks he has not deſerv'd of you this unwillingneſs to go to his houſe. 

You don't know the wickedneſs of the man you think it worth while to quarrel with all your friends for. 

You muſt not anſwer me. There will be no end of That. 

You know not the affliction you give to everybody; but to none more than to 

Your affectionate Aunt, DOROTHY HERVEY.Forbid to write to my aunt, I took a bolder liberty. I wrote a few lines to my mamma; imploringher to procure me leave to throw myſelf at my father's feet, and hers, if Imuſtgo (no-body elſe preſent), to beg pardon for the trouble I had given them both, and their bleſſings; and to receive their commands, as to my removal, and thewhen,from their own lips. 

'What new boldneſs This!—Take it back; and bid her learn to obey,'was my mamma's angry anſwer, with my letter return'd, unopen'd. 

But that I might omit nothing that was in my power, or heart, to do, that had an appearance of duty, I wrote a few lines to my papa himſelf, to the ſame purpoſe; begging he would not turn me out of his houſe, without his bleſſing. But This, torn in two pieces, and unopen'd, was brought me up again by Betty, with an air, one hand held up, the other extended, the torn letter in her open palm; and a See here!—What aſadthing is This!—Nothing will do but duty, Miſs!—Your papa ſaid, Let her tell me ofdeeds!—I'll receive nowordsfrom her: And ſo he tore the letter, and flung the pieces at my head. 

So deſperate my caſe, I was reſolved not to ſtop even at this repulſe. I took my pen, and addreſſed myſelf to my uncle Harlowe, incloſing that which my mamma had return'd unopen'd, and the torn unopen'd one ſent to my papa; having firſt ſcratch'd thro' a tranſcript for you. 

My uncle was going home, and it was deliver'd to him juſt as he ſtepped into his chariot. What may be the fate of it, therefore, I cannot know till to-morrow. 

The following is a copy of it. 

ToJOHN HARLOWE,Eſq.
My dear and ever-honoured Uncle,I Have no-body now but you, to whom I can apply, with hope, ſo much as to have my humble addreſſesopen'd and read. My aunt Hervey has given me commands which I want to have explain'd; but ſhe has forbid me writing to her. Hereupon I took the liberty to write to my papa and mamma: You will ſee, Sir, by the torn one, and by both being return'dun-open'd, what has been the reſult. This, Sir, perhaps you know: But, as you know not thecontentsof the diſgraced letters, I beſeech you to read them both, that you may be a witneſs for me, that they are not filled with complaints, with expoſtulations, nor contain any thing undutiful. Give me leave to ſay, Sir, That if deaf-ear'd anger will neither grantmea hearing, norwhat I writea peruſal, ſome time hence the hard-heartedneſs may be regretted. I beſeech you, dear, good Sir, to let me know what is meant by ſending me to my uncle Antony's, rather than to your houſe, or to my aunt's, or elſewhere? If it be for what I apprehend it to be, life will not be ſupportable upon the terms: I beg alſo to know, WHEN I am to be turned out of doors!—My heart ſtrongly gives me, that once I am compelled to leave this houſe, I never ſhall ſee it more. 

It becomes me, however, to declare, that I write not This thro' perverſeneſs, or in reſentment; God knows my heart, I do not!—But the treatment I apprehend I ſhall meet with, if carried to my other uncle's, will, in all probability, give the finiſhing ſtroke to the diſtreſſes, theundeſerveddiſtreſſes I will be bold to call them, of 

Your once highly favour'd, But now moſt unhappy, Kinſwoman, CL. HARLOWE.LETTER XV MiſsCLARISSA HARLOWE,To MiſsHOWE.
Monday morning, March 27.THIS morning early my uncle Harlowe came hither. He ſent me up the incloſed very tender letter. It has made me wiſh Icouldoblige him!—You'll ſee how Mr. Solmes's ill qualities are gloſs'd over in it. What blemiſhes does affection hide!—So, perhaps, may they ſay to me, What faults does antipathy bring to light! Be pleaſed to ſend me back this letter of my uncle's, by the firſt return. I may poſſibly try to account for, and wiſh to obviate, my being ſuch a formidable creature to my whole family, as I am repreſented in it. 

Sunday night, or rather Monday morning.I Muſt anſwer you, tho' againſt my own intention. Every-body loves you; and you know they do. The very ground you walk upon is dear to moſt of us. But how can we reſolve to ſee you? There is no ſtanding againſt your looks and language. It is the ſtrength of our love makes us decline to ſee you. Howcanwe, when you are reſolved not todo,what we are reſolved youſhalldo? I never, for my part, loved any creature, as I loved you from your youth till now. And indeed, as I have often ſaid, Never was there a young creature ſo deſerving of our love. But what is come to you now!—Alas! alas, my dear! How you fail in the trial! 

I have read the letters you incloſed. At a proper time, I may ſhew them to my brother and ſiſter. But they will receive nothing from you at preſent. 

For my part, I could not read your letter to myſelf, without being unmann'd. How can you be ſo unmov'd yourſelf, yet be ſo able to move every-body elſe? How could you ſend ſuch a letter to Mr. Solmes? Fie upon you!—How ſtrangely are you alter'd? 

Then to treat your brother and ſiſter as you did, that they don't care to write to you, or to ſee you.—Don't you know where it is written, Thatſoft anſwers turn away wrath?But if you will truſt to your ſharp-pointed wit, you may wound: But a club will beat down a ſword: And how can you expect, that they who are hurt by you will not hurt you again?—Was this the way you uſed to take to make us all adore you, as we did?—No, it was your gentleneſs of heart and manners, that made every-body, even ſtrangers, at firſt ſight, treat you as a Lady, and call you a Lady, tho' not born one, as your mamma was, any more than your ſiſter; while ſhe was only plain Miſs Harlowe, or Miſs Arabella. If youwereenvied, why ſhould you ſharpen envy, and file up its teeth to an edge?—You ſee I write like an impartial man, and as one that loves you ſtill! 

But ſince you have diſplay'd your talents, and ſpared no-body, and moved every-body, without being moved, you have but made us ſtand the cloſer and firmer together. This is what I likened to an imbattled Phalanx, once before. Your aunt Hervey forbids your writing, for the ſame reaſon that I muſt not countenance it. We are all afraid to ſee you, becauſe we know we ſhall be made as ſo many fools. Nay, your mamma is ſo afraid of you, that once or twice, when ſhe thought you was coming to force yourſelf into her preſence, ſhe ſhut the door, and locked herſelf in, becauſe ſhe knew ſhe muſt not ſee you uponyourterms, and you are reſolved you will not ſee her uponhers. 

Reſolve but to oblige us all, my deareſt Miſs Clary, and you ſhall ſee how we will claſp you every one by turns, to our rejoicing hearts!—If the one man has not the wit, and the parts, and the perſon, of the other, no one breathing has a worſe heart than that other: And is not the love of all your friends, and a ſober man (if he be not ſo poliſhed), to be preferredto a debauchee, tho' ever ſo sine a man, to look at? You have ſuch fine talents, that you will be adored by the one: But the other has as much advantage in thoſe reſpects, as you have yourſelf, and will not ſet by them one straw: For huſbands are ſometimes jealous of their authority, with witty wives. You will have, in one, a man of virtue. Had you not been ſo rudely affronting to him, he would have made your ears tingle, with what he could have told you of the other. 

Come, my dear niece, let me have the honour of doing with you what no-body elſe yet has been able to do. Your father, mother, and I, will divide the pleaſure, and thehonour,I will again call it, between us; and all paſt offences ſhall be forgiven; and Mr. Solmes, we will engage, ſhall take nothing amiſs hereafter, that is juſt. 

He knows, he ſays, what a jewel that man will have, who can obtain your favour; and he will think light of all he has ſuffer'd, or ſhall ſuffer, in obtaining you. 

Dear, ſweet creature, oblige us: And oblige us with a grace. Itmuſtbe done, whether with a grace or not. I do aſſure you itmuſt.You muſt not conquer father, mother, uncles, every-body: Depend upon That. 

I have ſat up half the night to write This. You don't know how I am touch'd at reading yours, and writing this. Yet will I be at Harlowe-place early in the morning. So, upon reading this, if you will oblige us all, ſend me word to come up to your apartment: And I will lead you down, and preſent you to the embraces of every-one: And you will then ſee, you have more of a brother and ſiſter, than of late your prejudices will let you think you have. This from one who uſed to love to ſtile himſelf 

Your paternal Uncle, JOHN HARLOWE.In about an hour after this kind letter was given me, my uncle ſent up to know, if he ſhould be a welcome viſitor, upon the terms mention'd in his letter? He bid Betty bring him down a verbal anſwer: A written one, he ſaid, would be a bad sign; and he bid her therefore not bring a letter. But I had juſt finiſh'd the incloſed tranſcription of one I had been writing. She made a difficulty to carry it; but was prevailed upon to oblige me, by a token which theſe Mrs. Betty's cannot withſtand. 

Dear and honoured Sir,HOW you rejoice me by your, condeſcending goodneſs!—So kind, ſo paternal a letter!—ſo ſoothing to a wounded heart; and of late what I have been ſo little uſed to!—How am I affected with it! Tell me not, dear Sir, of my way of writing: Your letter has more movedme,than I ever could moveany-body!—It has made me, with all my heart, wiſh I could intitle myſelf to be viſited upon your own terms; and to be led down to my papa and mamma, by ſo good and ſo kind an uncle. 

I will tell you, deareſt Sir, what I will do to make my peace. I have no doubt that Mr. Solmes would greatly prefer my ſiſter to ſuch a ſtrange, averſe creature as me: His chief, or one of his chief motives to addreſs me, is, as I have reaſon to believe, the contiguity of my grandfather's eſtate to his own: I will reſign it; for ever I will reſign it: And the reſignation muſt be good, becauſe I will never marry at all: I will make it over to my ſiſter, and her heirs for ever. I ſhall have no heirs, but my brother and her; and I will receive, as of my papa's bounty, ſuch an annuity (not in lieu of the eſtate, but asofhis bounty), as he ſhall be pleaſed to grant me, if it be ever ſo ſmall; and whenever I diſoblige him, he ſhall withdraw it, at his pleaſure. 

Will not This be accepted?—Sure it muſt!—Sureit will!—I beg of you, deareſt Sir, to propoſe it; and ſecond it with your intereſt. This will anſwer every end. My ſiſter has a high opinion of Mr. Solmes. I never can haveanyin the light he is propoſed to me. But as my ſiſter's huſband, he will be always intitled to my reſpect; and ſhall have it. 

If this be accepted, grant me, Sir, the honour of a viſit; and do me then the inexpreſſible pleaſure of leading me down to the feet of my honoured parents, and they ſhall find me the moſt dutiful of children; and to the arms of my brother and ſiſter, and they ſhall find me the moſt obliging and moſt affectionate of ſiſters. 

I wait, Sir, for your anſwer to this propoſal, made with the whole heart of 

Your dutiful and moſt obliged Niece, CL. HARLOWE.Monday noon.I HOPE this will be accepted: For Betty tells me, that my uncle Antony and my aunt Hervey are ſent for; and not Mr. Solmes, which I look upon as a favourable circumſtance. With what chearfulneſs will I aſſign over this envied eſtate!—What a much more valuable conſideration ſhall I part with it for!—The love and favour of all my relations!—That love and favour, which I uſed for eighteen years together to rejoice in, and be diſtinguiſhed by!—And what a charming pretence will this afford me of breaking with Mr. Lovelace! And how eaſy will it poſſibly make him, to part withme! 

I found this morning, in the uſual place, a letter from him, in anſwer, I ſuppoſe, to mine of Friday, which I depoſited not till Saturday. But I have not opened it; nor will I, till I ſee what effect this new offer will have. 

Let me but be permitted to avoid the man I hate; and I will give up, with all my heart, the man Icould prefer. To renounce the one, were I really to value him, as you ſeem to imagine, can give but a temporary concern, which time and diſcretion will make light: This is a ſacrifice which a child owes to parents and friends, if they inſiſt upon its being made. But the other, to marry a man onecannot endure,is not only a diſhoneſt thing, as to the man; but it is enough to make a creature, who wiſhes to be a good wife, a bad or indifferent one, as I once wrote to the man himſelf: And then ſhe can hardly be either a good miſtreſs; a good friend; or any thing but a diſcredit to her family, and a bad example to all around her. 

Methinks I am loth, in theſuſpenſeI am in at preſent, to depoſite this, becauſe I ſhall then leave you in asgreat:But having been prevented by Betty's officiouſneſs twice, I will now go down to my little poultry; and if I have an opportunity, will leave it in the uſual place, where I hope to find ſomething from you. 

LETTER XVI. MiſsCLARISSA HARLOWE,To MiſsHOWE.
Monday afternoon, March 27.I HAVE depoſited my narrative down to this day noon; but I hope ſoon to follow it with another letter, that I may keep you as little a while as poſſible in that ſuſpenſe, which I am ſo much affected by at this moment: For my heart is diſturbed at every foot I hear ſtir; and every door below, that I hear open or ſhut. 

They have been all aſſembled ſome time, and are in cloſe debate, I believe: But can there be room for long debate upon a propoſal, which, if accepted, will ſo effectually anſwer all their views?—Can they inſiſt a moment longer upon my having Mr. Solmes,when they ſee what ſacrifices I am ready to make, to be freed from his addreſſes?—O but I ſuppoſe the ſtruggle is, firſt, with Bella's nicety, to perſuade her to accept of the eſtate, and of the huſband; and next, with her pride, to take herſiſter's refuſals,as ſhe once phraſed it!—Or, it may be, my brother is inſiſting upon equivalents, for his reverſion in the eſtate: And theſe ſort of things take up but too much the attention of ſome of our family. To theſe, no doubt, one, or both, it muſt be owing, that my propoſal admits of ſo much conſideration. I want, methinks, to ſee, what Lovelace, in his letter, ſays. But I will deny myſelfthispiece of curioſity, till that which is raiſed by my preſent ſuſpenſe is anſwered.—Excuſe me, my dear, that I thus trouble you with my uncertainties. But I have no employment, nor heart, if I had, to purſue any other but what my pen affords me. 

Monday evening.WOULD you believe it?—Betty, by anticipation, tells me, that I am to be refuſed. I am'a vile, artful creature. Every-body is too good to me. My uncle Harlowe has beentaken-in,that's the phraſe. They knew how it would be, if he either wrote to me, or ſaw me. He has, however, been made aſhamed to be ſo wrought upon.—A pretty thing, truly, in the eye of the world, were they to take me at my word. It would look as if they had treated me thus hardly, asIthink it, for this very purpoſe. My peculiars, particularly Miſs Howe, would give it that turn; and I myſelf could mean nothing by it, but to ſee if it would be accepted, in order to ſtrengthen my own arguments againſt Mr. Solmes. It was amazing, that it could admit of a moment's deliberation: That any thing could beſuppoſedto be done in it. It was equally againſt Law and Equity: And a fine ſecurity Miſs Bellawould have, or Mr. Solmes, when I could reſume it when I would!—Mybrotherandſhemy heirs! O the artful creature!—Ito reſolve to live ſingle, when Lovelace was ſoſureof me!—and everywhere declared as much!—and could, whenever he pleaſed, if my huſband, claim under the Will!—Then the inſolence—the confidence—(as Betty mincingly told me, that one ſaid; you may eaſily gueſs who) that ſhe, who was ſo juſtly in diſgrace for downright rebellion, ſhould pretend to preſcribe to the whole family!—ſhould name a husband for her elder ſiſter!—What a triumph would her obſtinacy go away with, to delegate her commands, not as from a priſon, as ſhe called it, but as from her throne, to her elders and betters; and to her father and mother too!—Amazing, perfectly amazing! that any-body could argue upon ſuch a plan as this! It was a maſter-ſtroke of fineſſe!—It was ME in perfection!—Surely my uncle Harlowe will never be ſo taken-in again!' 

All this was the readier told me, becauſe it was againſt me, and would teaze and vex me. But as ſome of this fine recapitulation implied, that ſomebody ſpoke up for me, I was curious to know who it was: But Betty would not tell me, for fear I ſhould have the conſolation to find, thatallwere not againſt me. 

But do you not ſee, my dear, what a ſad creature ſhe is whom you honour with your friendſhip!—You could not doubt your influence over me: Why did you not let me know myſelf a little better?—Why did you not take the friendly liberty I have always taken with you, and tell me my faults, and what a ſpecious hypocrite I am? For if my brother and ſiſter could make ſuch diſcoveries, how is it poſſible, that faults ſo enormous [You could ſeeothers,you thought, of amore ſecretnature!] could eſcape your penetrating eye? 

Well, but now, it ſeems, they are debating how and by whom to anſwer me: For they know not, norarethey to know, that Mrs. Betty has told me all theſe fine things. One deſires to be excuſed, it ſeems: Another chooſes not to have any thing to ſay to me: Another has enough of me: And of writing to ſo ready a ſcribbler, there will be no end. 

Thus are thoſe imputed qualifications, which uſed ſo lately to gain me applauſe, now become my crimes; ſo much do diſguſt and anger alter the property of things. 

What will be the reſult of their debate, I ſuppoſe, will, ſome-how or other, be communicated to me by-and-by. But let me tell you, my dear, that I am made ſo deſperate, that I am afraid to open Mr. Lovelace's letter, leſt, in the humour I am in, I ſhould do ſomething, if I find it not exceptionable, that may give me repentance as long as I live! 

Monday night.THIS moment the following letter is brought me by Betty.Monday, 5 o' clock.Miſs Cunning-ones,YOUR fine, new propoſal is thought unworthy of a particular anſwer. Your uncle Harlowe is aſhamed to be ſo taken-in. Have you no new fetch for your uncle Antony? Go round with us, child, now your hand's in. But I was bid to write only one line, that you might not complain, as you did, of your worthy ſiſter, for the freedoms you provoked: It is This;—Prepare yourſelf. To-morrow you go to my uncle Antony's. That's all, child. 

JAMES HARLOWE. 

I was vexed to the heart at this: And immediately, in the warmth of reſentment, wrote the incloſed to my uncle Harlowe; who, it ſeems, ſtays here this night.ToJOHN HARLOWE,Eſq.
Monday night.Honoured Sir,I Find I am a very ſad creature, and did not know it. I wrote not to my Brother. Toyou,Sir, I wrote. FromyouI hope the honour of an anſwer. No one reveres her uncles more than I do. Nevertheleſs, I will be bold to ſay, that the diſtance, great as it is, between uncle and niece, excludes not ſuch a hope: And I think I have not made a propoſal that deſerves to be treated with ſcorn. 

Forgive me, Sir—My heart is full.—Perhaps one day you may think you have beenprevailed upon(for that is plainly the caſe!) to join to treat me, as I do not deſerve to be treated. Ifyouare aſhamed, as my brother hints, of having expreſſed any returning tenderneſs to me, God help me! I ſee I have no mercy to expect, from any-body! But, Sir, fromyourpen let me have an anſwer; I humbly beſeech it of you.—Till my brother can recollect what belongs to a ſiſter, I will take no anſwer fromhim,to the letter I wrote toyou,nor any commands whatever. 

Imove every-body! This, Sir, is what you are pleaſed to mention:—But whom have I moved?—One perſon in the family has more moving ways than I have, or he could never ſo undeſervedly have made every-body aſhamed to ſhew any tenderneſs to a poor diſtreſſed child of the ſame family. 

Return me not this with contempt, or torn, or unanſwer'd, I beſeech you. My papa has a title to do that, or any-thing, by his child: But from no other perſon in the world, of your ſex, ought a young creature, of mine (while ſhe preſerves a ſupplicating ſpirit), to be ſo treated. 

When what I have before written in the humbleſt ſtrain has met with ſuch ſtrange conſtructions, I am afraid, that this unguarded ſcrawl will be very ill-received. But I beg, Sir, you will oblige me withone line, be it ever ſo harſh, in anſwer to my propoſal. I ſtill think it ought to be attended to. I will enter into the moſt ſolemn engagements to make it valid, by a perpetual ſingle life. In a word, any thing Icando, Iwilldo, to be reſtored to all your favours. More I cannot ſay, but that I am, very undeſervedly, 

A moſt unhappy creature. 

Betty ſcrupled again to carry this letter; and ſaid, ſhe ſhould have anger; and I ſhould but have it returned in ſcraps and bits. 

I muſt take That chance, I ſaid: I only deſired ſhe would deliver it as directed. 

Sad doings! very ſad! ſhe ſaid, that young Ladies ſhould ſo violently ſet themſelves againſt their duty! 

I told her, ſhe ſhould have the liberty to ſay what ſhe pleaſed, ſo ſhe would but be my meſſenger that one time—And down ſhe went with it. 

I bid her, if ſhe could, ſlide it into my uncle's hand, unſeen; at leaſt, unſeen by my brother or ſiſter, for fear it ſhould meet, thro'theirgood offices, with the fate ſhe had beſpoken for it. 

She would not undertake for That, ſhe ſaid. 

I am now in expectation of the reſult. But having ſo little ground to hope for either favour or mercy, I opened Mr. Lovelace's letter. 

I would ſend it to you, my dear (as well as thoſe I ſhall incloſe, by this conveyance; but not being able at preſent to determine in what manner I ſhall anſwer it, I will give myſelf the trouble of abſtracting it here, while I am waiting for what may offer from the letter juſt gone down. 

'He laments, as uſual, my ill opinion of him, and readineſs to believe every thing to his diſadvantage. He puts into plain Engliſh, as I ſuppoſed he would, my hint, that I might be happier, if, by any raſhneſs he might be guilty of to Solmes, he ſhould come to an untimely end himſelf.' 

He is concerned, he ſays,'That the violence he had expreſſed on his extreme apprehenſiveneſs of loſing me, ſhould have made him guilty of any thing I had ſo much reaſon to reſent.' 

He owns,'That he is paſſionate: All good-natured men, he ſays, are ſo, and a ſincere man cannot hide it.'But appeals to me,'Whether, if any occaſion in the world could excuſe the raſhneſs of his expreſſions, it would not be his preſent dreadful ſituation, thro' my indifference, and the malice of his enemies.' 

He ſays,'He has more reaſon than ever, from the contents of my laſt, to apprehend, that I ſhall be prevailed upon by force, if not by fair means, to fall in with my brother's meaſures; and ſees but too plainly, that I am preparing him to expect it. 

'Upon this preſumption, he ſupplicates, with the utmoſt earneſtneſs, that I will not give way to the malice of his enemies. 

'Solemn vows of reformation, and everlaſting truth and obligingneſs, he makes; all in the ſtyle of deſponding humility; yet calls it a cruel turn upon him, to impute his proteſtations to a conſciouſneſs of the neceſſity there is for making them from his bad character. 

'He deſpiſes himſelf, he ſolemnly proteſts, for his paſt follies: Thanks God he has ſeen his error; and nothing but my more particular inſtructions, are wanting to perfect his reformation. 

'He promiſes, that he will do every thing that I ſhall think he can do with honour, to bring about a reconciliation with my father; and will even, if I inſiſt upon it, make the firſt overture to my brother, and treat him as his own brother, becauſe he is mine, if he will not, by new affronts, revive the remembrance of the paſt. 

'He begs, in the moſt earneſt and humble manner, for one half-hour's interview; undertaking bya key, which he owns he has to the garden-door, leading into theCoppice,as we call it (if I will but unbolt the door) to come into the garden at night, and wait till I have an opportunity to come to him, that he may re-aſſure me of the truth of all he writes, and of the affection, and, if needful, protection, of all his family. 

'He preſumes not, he ſays, to write by way of menace to me; but, if I refuſe him this favour, he knows not (ſo deſperate have ſome ſtrokes in my letter made him) what his deſpair may make him do.' 

He aſks me,'Determined, as my friends are, and far as they have already gone, and declare they will go, what I can propoſe to do, to avoid having Mr. Solmes, if I am carried to my uncle Antony's; unleſs I reſolve to accept of the protection he has offered to procure me; or except I will eſcape to London, or elſewhere, while Icaneſcape?' 

He adviſes me,'To ſue toyourmamma, for her private reception of me; only till I can obtain poſſeſſion of my own eſtate, and procure my friends to be reconciled to me; which he is ſure they will be deſirous tobe,the moment I am out of their power.' 

He appriſes me [It is ſtill my wonder, how he comes by his intelligence!],'That my friends have written to my couſin Morden, to repreſent matters to him in their own partial way; nor doubt they to influence him on their ſide of the queſtion. 

'That all this ſhews I have butone way,if none o•my own friends or intimates will receive me. 

'If I will tranſport him with the honour of my choice of thisone way,ſettlements ſhall be drawn with proper blanks, which I ſhall fill up as I pleaſe▪Let him but have my commands from my own mouth; all my doubts and ſcruples from my own lips; and only a repetition, that I will not, on anyconſideration, be Solmes's wife; and he ſhall be eaſy.—But, after ſuch a letter as I have written, nothing but an interview can make him ſo.'He beſeeches me, therefore,'To unbolt the door,as that very night.—If I receive not this time enough,this night;—and he will in a diſguiſe, that ſhall not give a ſuſpicion who he is, if he ſhould be ſeen, come to the garden-door, in hopes to open it with his key; nor will he have any other lodging than in the Coppice both nights: watching every wakeful hour for the propitious unbolting, unleſs he has a letter with my orders to the contrary, or to make ſome other appointment.' 

This letter was dated yeſterday: So he was there laſt night, I ſuppoſe; and will be there this night; and I have not written a line to him: And now it is too late, were I determinedwhatto write. 

I hope he will not go to Mr. Solmes!—I hope he will not come hither!—If he does, I will break with him for ever. 

What have I to do, with ſuch headſtrong ſpirits! I wiſh I had never—But what ſignifies wiſhing?—I am ſtrangely perplexed—But I need not have told you this, after ſuch a repreſentation of my ſituation. 

LETTER XVII. MiſsCLARISSA HARLOWE,To MiſsHOWE.
Tueſday Morning, 7o'Clock.MY uncle has vouchſafed to anſwer me. This is his letter; but juſt now brought me, altho' written laſt night; late, I ſuppoſe. 

Monday Night.Miſs Clary,SINCE you are grown ſuch a bold challenger, and teach us all our duty, tho' you will not practiſe your own, Imuſtanſwer you.—No-body wants your eſtate from you. Areyou,who refuſe every-body's advice, to preſcribe a huſband to yourſiſter?Your letter to Mr. Solmes is inexcuſable. I blam'd you for it before. Your parentswillbe obey'd. It is fit theyſhould.Your mamma has nevertheleſs prevailed to have your going to your uncle Antony's put of till Thurſday: Yet owns you deſerve not that, or any other favour from her. I will receive no more of your letters. You are too artful for me. You are an ingrateful and unreaſonable child! You will have your will paramount to every-body's. How are you alter'd! 

Your diſpleaſed Uncle, JOHN HARLOWE.To be carry'd away on Thurſday—To the moated Houſe—To the Chapel—To Solmes! How can I think of this!—They will make me deſperate! 

Tueſday Morn, Eight o'Clock.I HAVE another letter from Mr. Lovelace. I open'd it, with the expectation of its being filled with bold and free complaints, on my not writing to prevent his two nights watching, in weather not extremely agreeable. But, inſtead of complaints, he is'full of tender concern leſt I may have been prevented by indiſpoſition, or by the cloſer confinement which he has frequently caution'd me that I may expect.' 

He ſays,'He had been in different diſguiſes loitering about our garden and park wall, all the day on Sunday laſt; and all Sunday-night was wandering about the coppice, and near the back-door. It rain'dand he has got a great cold, attended with feveriſhneſs, and ſo hoarſe, that he has almoſt loſt his voice.' 

Why did he not flame out in his letter?—Treated, as I am treated by my friends, it is dangerous for me to lie under the ſenſe of an obligation to any one's patience, when that perſon ſuffers in health for my ſake. 

'He had no ſhelter, he ſays, but under the great overgrown Ivy, which ſpreads wildly round the heads of two or three Oaklings; and that was ſoon wet through.' 

You and I, my dear, once thought ourſelves obliged to the natural ſhade they afforded us, in a ſultry day. 

I can't help ſaying, I am ſorry he has ſuffer'd for my ſake.—But 'tis his own ſeeking! 

His letter is dated laſt night at eight:'And indiſpoſed as he is, he tells me, That he will watch till ten, in hopes of my giving him the meeting he ſo earneſtly requeſts. And after that, he has a mile to walk to his horſe and ſervant; and four miles then to ride to his inn.' 

He owns,'That he has an intelligencer in our family; who has failed him for a day or two paſt: And not knowing how I do, or how I may be treated, his anxiety is the greater.' 

This circumſtance gives me to gueſs who this treacherous man is: One Joſeph Leman: The very creature imploy'd and confided in, more than any other, by my brother. 

This is not an honourable way of proceeding in Mr. Lovelace.—Did he learn this infamous practice of corrupting the ſervants of other families at the French Court, where he reſided a good while? 

I have been often jealous of this Leman in my little airings and poultry-viſits: I have thought him (doubly obſequious, as he was always to me) my brother's ſpyupon me; and, altho' he oblig'd me by his haſtening out of the garden, and poultry-yard, whenever I came into either, have wonder'd, that from his reports my liberties of thoſe kinds have not been abridged. So, poſſibly, this man may take a bribe of both, and yet betray both. Worthy views want not ſuch obliquities as theſe on either ſide. An honeſt mind muſt riſe into indignation both at the traitor-maker and the traitor. 

'He preſſes with the utmoſt earneſtneſs for an interview. He would not offer, he ſays, to diſobey my laſt perſonal commands, that he ſhould not endeavour to attend me again in the wood-houſe. But ſays, he can give me ſuch reaſons, for my permitting him to wait upon my father or uncles, as he hopes will be approved by me: For be cannot help obſerving, that it is no more ſuitable to my own ſpirit than to his, that he, a man of fortune and family, ſhould be obliged to purſue ſuch a clandeſtine addreſs, as would only become a vile fortune-hunter. But, if I will give my conſent for his viſiting me like a man, and a gentleman, no treatment ſhall provoke him to forfeit his temper. 

'His uncle will accompany him, if I pleaſe: Or his aunt Lawrance will firſt make the viſit to my mamma, or to my aunt Hervey, or even to my uncles, if I chooſe it. And ſuch terms ſhall be offer'd, asſhallhave weight upon them. 

'He begs, that I will not deny him making a viſit to Mr. Solmes. By all that's good, he vows, that it ſhall not be with the leaſt intention either to hurt or affront him; but only to ſet before him calmly and rationally, the conſequences that may poſſibly flow from ſo fruitleſs a perſeverance; as well as the ungenerous folly of it; to a mind ſo noble as mine. He repeats his own reſolution to attend my pleaſure, and Mr. Morden's arrival and advice, for the reward of his own patience. 

'It is impoſſible, he ſays, but one of theſe methods?muſtdo. Preſence, he obſerves, even of a diſliked perſon, takes off the edge from reſentments which abſence whets, and makes keen. 

'He therefore moſt earneſtly repeats his importunities for the ſupplicated interview.'Says,'He has buſineſs of conſequence in London: But cannot ſtir from the inconvenient ſpot, where he has for ſome time reſided in diſguiſes unworthy of himſelf, until he can be abſolutely certain, that I ſhall not be prevailed upon, either by force or otherwiſe; and until he finds me deliver'd from the inſults of my brother. Nor ought This to be an indifferent point to one, for whoſe ſake, all the world reports me to be uſed ſo unworthily as I am uſed.—Butoneremark, he ſays, he cannot help making; That did my friends know the little favour I ſhew him, and the very great diſtance I keep him at, they would have no reaſon to confine me, on his account: Andanother,that they themſelves ſeem to think him intitled to a different uſage, and expect that he receives it; when, in truth, what he meets with from me is exactly what they wiſh him to meet with, excepting in the favour of the correſpondence I honour him with: upon which, he ſays, he puts the higheſt value, and for the ſake of which he has chearfully ſubmitted to a thouſand indignities. 

'He renews his profeſſions of reformation: He is convinc'd, he ſays, that he has already run a long and dangerous courſe; and that it is high time to think of returning: It muſt be from proper convictions, he ſays, that a perſon who has lived too gay a life reſolves to reclaim, before age or ſufferings come upon him. 

'All generous ſpirits, he obſerves, hate compulſion. Upon this obſervation he dwells; but regrets, that he is likely to owe all his hopes to this compulſion; thisinjudiciouscompulſion, he juſtly calls it; andnone to my eſteem for him. Altho' he preſumes upon ſome merit, In his implicit regard to my will: In the bearing the daily indignities offer'd not only to him, but to his relations, by my brother: In the nightly watchings, and riſques which he runs, in all weathers; and which his preſent indiſpoſition makes him mention, or he had not debaſed the nobleneſs of his paſſion for me, by ſuch a ſelfiſh inſtance.'—I cannot but ſay, I am ſorry the man is not well. 

I am afraid to aſk you, my dear, whatyouwould have done, thus ſituated. But what Ihavedone, Ihavedone. In a word, I wrote,'That I would, if poſſible, give him a meeting to-morrow night, between the hours of nine and twelve, by the ivy-ſummer-houſe, or in it, or near the great caſcade, at the bottom of the garden; and would unbolt the door, that he might come in by his own key. But that, if I found the meeting impracticable, or ſhould change my mind, I would ſignify as much by another line; which he muſt wait for until it were dark.' 

Tueſday, Eleven o' Clock.I AM juſt return'd from depoſiting my billet. How diligent is this man! It is plain he was in waiting: For I had walked but a few paces, after I had depoſited it, when, my heart miſgiving me, I return'd, to have taken it back, in order to reconſider it as I walked, and whether I ſhould, or ſhould not, let it go: But I found it gone. 

In all probability, there was but a brick wall, of a few inches thick, between Mr. Lovelace and me, at the very time I put the letter under the brick. 

I am come back diſſatisfy'd with myſelf. But I think, my dear, there can be no harm in meeting him: If I donot,he may take ſome violent meaſures: What he knows of the treatment I meet with in malice to him, and with a view to fruſtrate all his hopes, may make him deſperate. His behaviour laſt time Iſaw him, under the diſadvantages of time and place, and ſurpriſed as I was, gives me no apprehenſion of any thing but diſcovery. What he requires is not unreaſonable, and cannot affect my future choice and determination: It is only to aſſure him from my own lips, that I will never be the wife of a man I hate. If I have not an opportunity to meet without hazard or detection, he muſt once more bear the diſappointment. All his trouble, and mine too, is owing to his faulty character. This, altho' I hate tyranny and arrogance in all ſhapes, makes me think leſs of the riſques he runs, and the fatigues he undergoes, than otherwiſe I ſhould do; and ſtill leſs, as my ſufferings (derived from the ſame ſource) are greater than his. 

Betty confirms the intimation, that I muſt go to my uncle's on Thurſday. She was ſent on purpoſe to direct me to prepare myſelf for going, and to help me to get up every thing in order to it. 

LETTER XVIII. MiſsCLARISSA HARLOWE,To MiſsHOWE.
Tueſday, Three o' Clock, March 28.I HAVE mention'd ſeveral times the pertneſs of Mrs. Betty to me; and now, having a little time upon my hands, I will give you a ſhort dialogue that paſſed juſt now between us: It may, perhaps, be a little relief to you from the dull ſubjects with which I am perpetually teazing you. 

As ſhe attended me at dinner, ſhe took notice, That Nature is ſatisfy'd with a very little nouriſhment: And thus ſhe complimentally proved it:—For, Miſs, ſaid ſhe, you eat nothing; yet never looked more charmingly in your life. 

As to the former part of your ſpeech, Betty, ſaid I, you obſerve well; and I have often thought, whenI have ſeen how healthy the children of the labouring poorlook,andare,with empty ſtomachs, and hardly a good meal in a week, that Providence is very kind to its creatures, in this reſpect, as well as in all others, in makingMuchnot neceſſary to the ſupport of life; when three parts in four of its creatures, if it were, would not know how to obtain it. It puts me in mind of two proverbial ſentences, which are full of admirable meaning. 

What, pray, Miſs, are they? I love to hear you talk, when you are ſo ſedate as you ſeem now to be. 

The one is to the purpoſe we are ſpeaking of;Poverty is the mother of health:And let me tell you, Betty, if I had a better appetite, and were to encourage it, with ſo little reſt, and ſo much diſtreſs and perſecution, I don't think I ſhould be able to preſerve my reaſon. 

There's no inconvenience but has its convenience,ſaid Betty, giving me proverb for proverb. But what is the other, Madam? 

That thepleaſures of the mighty are obtain'd by the tears of the poor:It is but reasonable therefore, methinks, that the plenty of the one ſhould be followed by diſtempers; and that the indigence of the other ſhould be attended with that health, which makes all its other diſcomforts light on the compariſon. And hence a third proverb, Betty, ſince you are an admirer of proverbs;Better a bare foot, than none at all; that is to ſay, than not to be able to walk. 

She was mightily taken with what I ſaid: See, ſaid ſhe, what a fine thing ſcholarſhip is!—I, ſaid ſhe, had always, from a girl, a taſte for reading, tho' it were but inMother Gooſe,and concerning theFairies[And then ſhe took genteelly a pinch of ſnuff]: Could but my parentshave let go as faſt as I pulled,I ſhould have been a very happy creature. 

Very likely, you would have made great improvements, Betty: But as it is, I cannot ſay, but ſince Ihave had the favour of your attendance in thisintimatemanner, I have heard ſmarter things from you, than I have heard at table from ſome of my brother's fellow-collegians. 

Your ſervant, dear Miſs; dropping me one of her beſt courteſies: So fine a judge as you are!—It is enough to make one very proud. Then, with another pinch—I cannot indeed but ſay, bridling upon it, that I have heard famous ſcholars often and often ſay very ſilly things: Things I ſhould be aſhamed myſelf to ſay—But I thought they did it out of humility, and in condeſcenſion to thoſe who had not their learning. 

That ſhe might not be too proud, I told her, I would obſerve, that the livelineſs and quickneſs ſhe ſo happily diſcovered in herſelf, was not ſo much an honour to her, as what ſhe owed to herSex; which, as I had obſerved in many inſtances, had great advantages over the other, in all the powers that related to imagination: And hence, Mrs. Betty, you'll take notice, as I have of late had opportunity to do, that your own talent at repartee and ſmartneſs, when it hasſomething to work upon,diſplays itſelf to more advantage, than could well be expected from one whoſe friends, to ſpeak in your own phraſe, could notlet go ſo faſt as you pulled. 

The wench gave me a proof of the truth of my obſervation, in a manner ſtill more alert than I had expected: If, ſaid ſhe, our ſex have ſo much advantage inſmartneſs,it is the leſs to be wondered at, thatyou,Miſs, who have had ſuch an education, ſhould outdo all the men and women too, that come near you. 

Bleſs me, Betty, ſaid I, what a proof do you give me of your wit and your courage at the ſame time! This is outdoing yourſelf. It would make young Ladies leſs proud, and more apprehenſive, were they generally attended by ſuch ſmart ſervants, and theirmouths permitted to be unlocked upon them, as yours has lately been upon me!—But, take away, Mrs. Betty. 

Why, Miſs, you have eat nothing at all:—I hope you are not diſpleaſed with your dinner for any thing I have ſaid. 

No, Mrs. Betty, I am pretty well uſed to your freedoms, now, you know.—I am not diſpleaſed in the main, to obſerve, that, were the ſucceſſion of modern fine Ladies to be extinct, it might be ſupplied from thoſe whom they place in the next rank to themſelves, their chambermaids and confidants. Your young miſtreſs has contributed a great deal to this quickneſs of yours. She always preferred your company to mine. Asyou pulled, ſhe let go; and ſo, Mrs. Betty, you have gained byherconverſation what I have loſt. 

Why, Miſs, if you come to that, no-body ſays better things than Miſs Harlowe. I could tell you one, ifI pleaſed,upon my obſerving to her, that you lived of late upon air, and had no ſtomach to any thing, yet looked as charmingly as ever.— 

I dare ſay, it was a very good-natured one, Mrs. Betty!—Do you thenpleaſethat I ſhall hear it? 

Only this, Miſs,That your ſtomachfulneſs had ſwallowed up your ſtomach; and,That obſtinacy was meat, drink, and cloth to you. 

Ay, Mrs. Betty; anddidſhe ſay This?—I hope ſhe laughed when ſhe ſaid it, as ſhe does at all hergood things,as ſhe calls them. It was very ſmart, and very witty. I wiſh my mind were ſo much at eaſe, as to aim at being witty too. But if you admire ſuch ſententious ſayings, I'll help you to another; and that is,Encouragement and Approbation make people ſhew talents they were never ſuſpected to have; and This will do both for miſtreſs and maid: And another I'll furniſh you with, the contrary of the former, that will do only for me; ThatPerſecutionand Diſcouragement depreſsingenuousminds, and blunt the edge of lively imaginations.—And hence may my ſiſter's Brilliancy and my Stupidity be both accounted for.Ingenuous,you muſt know, Mrs. Betty, andingenious,are two things; and I would not arrogate the latter to myſelf. 

Lord, Miſs, ſaid the Fooliſh, you know a great deal for your years.—You are a very learned young Lady!—What pity— 

None of yourpities,Mrs. Betty. I know what you'd ſay. But tell me, if you can, Is it reſolved that I ſhall be carry'd to my uncle Antony's on Thurſday? 

I was willing to reward myſelf for the patience ſhe had made me exerciſe, by getting at what intelligence I could from her. 

Why, Miſs, ſeating herſelf at a little diſtance (excuſe my ſitting down), with the ſnuff-box tapp'd very ſmartly, the lid opened, and a pinch taken with a dainty finger and thumb, the other three fingers diſtendedly bent, and with a fine flouriſh—I cannot but ſay, that it is my opinion, you will certainly go on Thurſday; and thisnoleſs foleſs,as I have heard my young Lady ſay in FRENCH. 

Whether I amwillingornot willing,you mean, I ſuppoſe, Mrs. Betty? 

You have it, Miſs. 

Well but, Betty, I have no mind to be turned out of doors ſo ſuddenly. Do you think I could not be permitted to tarry one week longer? 

How can I tell, Miſs? 

O Mrs. Betty, you can tell a great deal, ifyou pleaſe.But here I am forbid writing to any one of my family; none of it now will come nearme; nor will any of it permit me to ſeethem:How ſhall I do to make my requeſt known, to tarry here a week or fortnight longer! 

Why, Miſs, I fanſy, if you were to ſhew a compliabletemper, your friends would ſhew a compliable one too. But would you expect favours, and grant none? 

Smartly put, Betty! But who knows what may be the reſult of my being carried to my uncle Antony's? 

Who knows, Miſs!—Why any-body will gueſs what may be the reſult. 

As how, Betty? 

As how!repeated the pert wench, Why, Miſs, you will ſtand in your own light, as you have hitherto done: And your parents, as ſuch good parentsought,will be obeyed. 

If, Mrs. Betty, I had not been uſed to youroughts,and to have my duty laid down to me, by your oraculous wiſdom, I ſhould be apt to ſtare at the liberty of your ſpeech. 

You ſeem angry, Miſs. I hope I take no unbecoming liberty. 

If thou really think'ſt thou doſt not, thy ignorance is more to be pitied, than thy pertneſs reſented. I wiſh thou'd'ſt leave me to myſelf. 

When young Ladies fall out with theirownduty, it is not much to be wondered at, that they are angry at any-body who dotheirs. 

That's a very pretty ſaying, Mrs. Betty!—I ſee plainly whatthyduty is inthynotion, and am obliged to thoſe who taught it thee. 

Every-body takes notice, Miſs, that you can ſay very cutting words in a cool manner, and yet not call names, as I have knownſomegentlefolks, as well as others, do, when in a paſſion. But I wiſh you had permitted 'Squire Solmes to ſee you; he would have told you ſuch ſtories of 'Squire Lovelace, as would have turned your heart againſt him for ever. 

And know you any of the particulars of thoſe ſad ſtories? 

Indeed, I don't; but you'll hear all at your uncle Antony's, I ſuppoſe; and a great deal more, perhaps, than you will like to hear. 

Let me hear what I will, I am determined againſt Mr. Solmes, were it to coſt me my life. 

If you are, Miſs, the Lord have mercy on you! For what with this letter of yours to 'Squire Solmes, whom they ſo much value, and what with their antipathy to 'Squire Lovelace, whom they hate, they will have no patience with you. 

What will they do, Betty? They won't kill me? Whatwillthey do? 

Kill you! No!—But you will not be ſuffered to ſtir from thence, till you have complied with your duty. Andno pen and inkwill be allowed you, as here; where they are of opinion you make no good uſe of it: Nor would it be allowed here, only as they intend ſo ſoon to ſend you away to your uncle's. Nobody will be permitted to ſee you, or to correſpond with you. What farther will be done, I can't ſay; and, if I could, it may not be proper. But you may prevent it all, by One word: And I wiſh you would, Miſs. All then would be eaſy and happy. And, if I may ſpeak my mind, I ſee not why one man is not as good as another: Why, eſpecially, a ſober man is not as good as a rake. 

Well, Betty, ſaid I, ſighing, all thy impertinence goes for nothing. But I ſee I am deſtined to be a very unhappy creature. Yet will I venture upon one requeſt more to them. 

And ſo, quite ſick of the pert creature, and of myſelf, I retired to my cloſet, and wrote a few lines to my uncle Harlowe, notwithſtanding his prohibition; in order to get a reprieve, from being carried away ſo ſoon as Thurſday next, if I muſt go. And This, that I might, if comply'd with, ſuſpend the appointment I have made with Mr. Lovelace; for my heart miſgives me, as to meeting him; and that more andmore, I know not why. Under the ſuperſcription of the letter, I wrote theſe words: 'Pray, dear Sir, 'be pleaſed to give This a reading. 

This is the copy of what I wrote:Tueſday Afternoon.Honoured Sir,LET me this once be heard with patience, and have my petition granted. It is only, that I may not be hurried away ſo ſoon as next Thurſday. 

Why ſhould the poor girl be turned out of doors ſo ſuddenly, ſo diſgracefully? Procure for me, Sir, one fortnight's reſpite. In that ſpace of time, I hope you will all relent. My mamma ſhall not need to ſhut her door, in apprehenſion of ſeeing her diſgraced child. I will not preſume to think of entering her preſence, or my papa's, without leave. One fortnight's reſpite is but a ſmall favour for them to grant, except I am to be refuſed every-thing I aſk: But it is of the higheſt import to my peace of mind. Procure it for me, therefore, dear Sir, and you will exceedingly oblige 

Your dutiful, tho' greatly afflicted, Niece, CL. HARLOWE. 

I ſent this down: My uncle was not gone: And he now ſtays to know the reſult of the queſtion put to me in the incloſed anſwer, which he has given to mine:YOUR going to your uncle's was abſolutely concluded upon for next Thurſday. Nevertheleſs, your mamma, ſeconded by Mr. Solmes, pleaded ſo ſtrongly to indulge you, that your requeſt for a delay will be comply'd with, upon one condition; and whether for a fortnight, or a ſhorter time, that will depend upon yourſelf. If you refuſe this condition, your mamma declares, ſhe will give over all further interceſſion for you.—Nor do you deſervethis favour, as you put it upon our relenting, not your own. 

This condition is, That you admit of a viſit from Mr. Solmes, for one hour, in company of your brother, your ſiſter, or your uncle Antony, chooſe which you will. 

If you comply not, you go next Thurſday to a houſe which is become ſo ſtrangely odious to you of late, whether you get ready to go, or not. Anſwer therefore directly to the point. No evaſion. Name your day and hour. Mr. Solmes will neither eat you, nor drink you. Let us ſee, whetherweare to be comply'd within any thing,or not. 

JOHN HARLOWE. 

After a very little deliberation, I reſolved to conſent to this condition. All I fear is, that Mr. Lovelace's intelligencer may inform him of it; and that his apprehenſions upon it may make him take ſome deſperate reſolution: Eſpecially as now (having more time given me, here) I think to write to him to ſuſpend the interview he is poſſibly ſo ſure of. I ſent down the following to my uncle:Honoured Sir,ALtho' I ſee not what end the propoſed condition can anſwer, I comply with it. I wiſh I could with every thing expected of me. If I muſt name one, in whoſe company I am to ſee the gentleman, and that onenotmy mamma, whoſe preſence I could wiſh to be honoured by on the occaſion, let my uncle, if he pleaſes, be theperſon.If I muſt name theday(a long day, I doubt▪will not be permitted me), let it be next Tueſday. Thehour,four in the afterternoon. Theplace,either the ivy-ſummer-houſe, or in the little parlour I uſed to be permitted to call mine. 

Be pleaſed, Sir, nevertheleſs, to prevail upon mymamma to vouchſafe me her preſence on the occacaſion. I am, Sir, 

Your ever-dutiful CL. HARLOWE. 

A reply is juſt ſent me. I thought it became my averſeneſs to this meeting, to name a diſtant day: But I did not expect they would have comply'd with it. So here is one week gain'd!—This is it:YOU have done well to comply. We are willing to think the beſt of every ſlight inſtance of your duty. Yet have you ſeem'd to conſider the day as an evil day, and ſo put it far off. This nevertheleſs is granted you, as no time need to be loſt, if you are as generousafterthe d•y, as we are condeſcendingbeforeit. Let me adviſe you, not to harden your mind; nor take up your reſolution beforehand. Mr. Solmes has more awe, and even terror, at the thoughts of ſeeing you, than you can have at the thoughts of ſeeing him.Hismotive isLove; let notyoursbeHatred.My brother Antony will be preſent, in hopes you will deſerve well ofhim,by behaving well to the friend of the family. See you uſe him as ſuch. Your mamma had permiſſion to be there, if ſhe thought fit: But ſays, ſhe would not, for a thouſand pounds, unleſs you would encourage her beforehand, as ſhe wiſhes to be encouraged. One hint I am to give you, mean time. It is this: To make a diſcreet uſe of your pen and ink. Methinks a young creature of niceneſs ſhould be leſs ready to write to one man, when ſhe is deſigned to be another's. 

This compliance, I hope, will produce greater; and then the peace of the family will be reſtored: Which is what is heartily wiſhed by 

Your loving Uncle, JOHN HARLOWE.Unleſs it be to the purpoſe our hearts are ſet upon, you need not write again. 

 

This man havemore terror at ſeeing me, than I can have at ſeeing him!—How can that be? If he had half as much, he would not wiſh to ſee me!—HISmotive Love!—Yes indeed! Love of himſelf!—He knows no other!—For Love, that deſerves the name, ſeeks the ſatisfaction of the beloved object, more than its own!—Weighed in this ſcale, what a profanation is this man guilty of! 

Not to take up my reſolution beforehand!—That advice comes too late! 

But I muſtmake a diſcreet uſe of my pen.That, I doubt, as they have managed it, in the ſenſe they mean it, is as much cut of my power, as the other. 

Butto write to one man, when I am deſigned for another!What a ſhocking expreſſion is That! 

Repenting of my appointment with Mr. Lovelace,beforeI had this favour granted me, you may believe I heſitated not a moment about revoking itnow,that I had gained ſuch a reſpite. Accordingly, I wrote,'That I found it inconvenient to meet him, as I had intended: That the riſque I ſhould run of a diſcovery, and the miſchiefs that might flow from it, could not be juſtified by any end that ſuch a meeting could anſwer: That I found one certain ſervant more in my way, when I took my morning and evening airings, than any other: That he knew not but that the perſon who might betray the ſecrets of a family tohim,might be equally watchful to oblige thoſe whom he ought to oblige; and ſo, if opportunity were given him, might betray me, or him, to them: That I had not been uſed to a conduct ſo faulty, as to lay myſelf at the mercy of ſervants: And was ſorry he had meaſures to purſue, that made ſteps neceſſary in his own opinion, which, in mine, were very culpable, and which no end could juſtify: That things drawing towards a criſis between me and my friends, an interview could avail nothing; eſpecially as the method by which this correſpondencewas carried on, was not ſuſpected, and he could write all that was in his mind to write: That I expected to be at liberty to judge of what was proper and fit upon this occaſion: Eſpecially as he might be aſſured, that I would ſooner chooſe death, than Mr. Solmes.' 

Tueſday Night.I HAVE depoſited my letter to Mr. Lovelace. Threatening as things look againſt me, I am much better pleaſed with myſelf, than I was before. I reckon he will be a little out of humour upon it, however. But as I reſerved to myſelf the liberty of changing my mind; and as it is eaſy for him to imagine there may be reaſons for itwithin-doors, which he cannot judge ofwithout; and I have ſuggeſted to him ſome of them; I ſhould think it ſtrange, if he acquieſces not, on this occaſion, with a chearfulneſs, which may ſhew me, that his laſt letter is the genuine product of his heart: For if he be really ſo much concerned at his paſt faults, as he pretends, and has for ſome time pretended, muſt he not, of courſe, have corrected, in ſome degree, the impetuoſity of his temper? The firſt ſtep to reformation, as I conceive, is to ſubdue ſudden guſts of paſſion, from which frequently the greateſt evils ariſe, and to learn to bear diſappointments. If the iraſcible paſſions cannot be overcome, what opinion ſhall one have of the perſon's power over thoſe to which bad habit, joined togreatertemptation, gives ſtronger force? 

Pray, my dear, be ſo kind, as to make inquiry by ſome ſafe hand, after the diſguiſes Mr. Lovelace aſſumes at the inn he puts up at in the poor village of Neale, he calls it. If it be the ſame I take it to be, I never knew it was conſiderable enough to have a name; nor that it has an inn in it. 

As he muſt be much there, to be ſo conſtantly near us, I would be glad to have ſome account of his behaviour;and what the people think of him. In ſuch a length of time, he muſt give ſcandal, or hope of reformation. Pray, my dear, humour me, in this inquiry: I have reaſons for it, which you ſhall be acquainted with another time, if the reſult of the inquiry diſcover them not. 

LETTER XIX. MiſsCLARISSA HARLOWE,To MiſsHOWE.
Wedneſday Morning, Nine o'clock.I AM juſt return'd from my morning walk, and already have received a letter from Mr. Lovelace in anſwer to mine depoſited laſt night. He muſt have had pen, ink, and paper, with him; for it was written in the coppice; with this circumſtance; On one knee, kneeling with the other. Not from reverence to the written-to, however, as you'll find. 

Well are we inſtructed early to keep this ſex at a diſtance. An undeſigning open heart, where it is loth to diſoblige, is eaſily drawn in, I ſee, to oblige more than ever it deſigned. It is too apt to govern itſelf by what a bold ſpirit is encouraged toexpectof it. It is very difficult for a good natured young perſon to give a negative where it diſeſteems not. 

One's heart may harden and contract, as one gains experience, and when we have ſmarted perhaps for our eaſy folly: And ſo itought,or it would be upon very unequal terms with the world. 

Excuſe theſe grave reflections. This man has vex'd me heartily. I ſee his gentleneſs wasart; fierceneſs, and a temper like what I have been too much uſed to at home, arenaturein him. In the mind I am in, nothing ſhall ever make me forgive him, ſince there can be no good reaſon for his impatience on an expectation given with reſerve, and abſolutely revocable.—Iſo much to ſufferthro'him; yet, to be treated as if I were obliged to bear inſultsfromhim!— 

But here you will be pleaſed to read his letter; which I ſhall incloſe. 

To MiſsCLARISSA HARLOWE.
Good God!WHAT is now to become of me!—How ſhall I ſupport this diſappointment!—No new cauſe!—On one knee, kneeling with the other, I write!—My feet benumbed with midnight wanderings thro' the heavieſt dews, that ever fell: My wig and my linen dripping with the hoar-froſt diſſolving on them!—Day but juſt breaking—Sun not riſen to exhale—May it never riſe again!—Unleſs it bring healing and comfort to a benighted ſoul!—In proportion to the joy you had inſpired (ever lovely promiſer!), in ſuch proportion is my anguiſh! 

Andare things drawing towards a criſis between your friends and you?—Is not this a reaſon for me to expect, theratherto expect, the promiſed interview? 

CANI write all that is in my mind,ſay you?—Impoſſible!—Not the hundredth part of what is in my mind, and in my apprehenſion, can I write! 

O the wavering, the changeable ſex!—But can Miſs Clariſſa Harlowe— 

Forgive me, Madam!—I know not what I write!—Yet, I muſt, I do, inſiſt upon your promiſe—Or that you will condeſcend to find better excuſes for the failure—Or convince me, that ſtronger reaſons are impoſed uponyou,than thoſe you offer.—A promiſeoncegiven; upondeliberationgiven!—the promiſe-edonly can diſpenſe with;—or ſome very apparent neceſſity impoſed upon the promiſe-er,which leaves no power to perform it. 

The firſt promiſe you ever made me! Life andDeath, perhaps, depending upon it—My heart deſponding from the barbarous methods reſolved to be taken with you, in malice to me! 

You would ſooner chooſe death than Solmes(How my ſoul ſpurns the competition!) O my beloved creature, what are theſe butwords!—Whoſewords?—Sweet and ever-adorable—What?—Promiſe-breaker—muſt I call you?—How ſhall I believe the aſſeveration (your ſuppoſed Duty in the queſtion! Perſecution ſo flaming! Hatred to me ſo ſtrongly avow'd!) after this inſtance of your ſo lightly diſpenſing with your promiſe! 

If, my deareſt life! you would prevent my diſtraction, or, at leaſt diſtracted conſequences, renew the promiſed hope!—Myfateis indeed upon its criſis. 

Forgive me; deareſt creature, forgive me!—I know I have written in too much anguiſh of mind!—Writing this, in the ſame moment that the juſt-dawning light has imparted to me the heavy disappointment! 

I dare not re-peruſe what I have written.—Imuſtdepoſite it—It may ſerve to ſhew you my diſtracted apprehenſions, that This diſappointment is but a prelude to the greateſt of All.—Nor, having here, any other paper, am I able to write again, if I would, on this gloomy ſpot. Gloomy is my ſoul; and all nature round me partakes of my gloom!—I truſt it, therefore, to your goodneſs! If its fervor excites your diſpleaſure, rather than your pity, you wrong my paſſion; and I ſhall be ready to apprehend, that I am intended to be the ſacrifice of more miſcreants than one!—Have patience with me, deareſt creature!—I mean Solmes, and your Brother only—But, if, exerting your uſual generoſity, you will excuſe andre-appoint, may That God, whom you profeſs to ſerve, and who is the God ofTruthand ofPromiſes,protectand bleſs you, for both; and for reſtoring to Himſelf, and to Hope, 

Your ever-adoring, yet almoſt deſponding LOVELACE!Ivy-Cavern in the Coppice—day but juſt breaking.This is the Anſwer I ſhall return. 

Wedneſday Morning.I AM amazed, Sir, at the freedom of your reproaches. Preſſed and teazed, againſt convenience and inclination, to give you a private meeting, amIto be thus challeng'd and upbraided, and my Sex reflected upon, becauſe I thought it prudent to change my mind?—A liberty I had reſerved to myſelf, when I made theappointment,as you call it. I wanted not inſtances of your impatient ſpirit to other people: yet may it be happy for me, that I have this new one; which ſhews, that you can as little ſpareme,when I purſue the dictates of my own reaſon, as you doothers,for acting up to theirs. Two motives you muſt be governed by in this exceſs. The onemy eaſineſs; the otheryour own preſumption.Since you think you have found out thefirſt,and have ſhewn ſo much of thelaſtupon it, I am too much alarmed, not to wiſh and deſire, that your letter of this day may conclude all the trouble you have had from, or for, 

Your humble Servant, CL. HARLOWE.I BELIEVE, my dear, I may promiſe myſelf your approbation, whenever I write or ſpeak with ſpirit, be it to whom it will. Indeed, I find but too much reaſon to exert it, ſince I have to deal with people, who meaſure their conduct to me, not by what is fit or decent, right or wrong, but by what they think mytemper will bear. I have, till very lately, been praiſed for mine; but it has always been by thoſe who never gave me opportunity to return the compliment to themſelves: Some people have acted, as if they thought forbearance onone ſideabſolutely neceſſary for them and me, to be upon good terms together; and in this caſe have ever taken care rather toowethat obligation than tolayit. You have hinted to me, that reſentment is not natural to my temper, and that therefore it muſt ſoon ſubſide. It may be ſo, with reſpect to my relations: But not to Mr. Lovelace, I aſſure you. 

Wedneſday Noon, March 29.WE cannot always anſwer for what wecando: But to convince you, that I can keep my above reſolution, with regard to This Lovelace, angry as my letter is, and three hours as it is ſince it was written, I aſſure you, that I repent it not, nor will ſoften it, altho' I find it is not taken away. And yet I hardly ever before did any-thing in anger, that I did not repent in half an hour; and queſtion myſelf inleſsthan that time, whether I was right or wrong. 

In this reſpite till Tueſday, I have a little time to look about me, as I may ſay, and conſider of what Ihaveto do, andcando. And Mr. Lovelace's inſolence will make me go very home with myſelf. Not that I think I can conquer my averſion to Mr. Solmes. I am ſure I cannot. But, if I abſolutely break with Mr. Lovelace, and give my friends convincing proofs of it, who knows but they will reſtore me to their favour, and let their views in relation to the other man go off by degrees?—Or, at leaſt, that I may be ſafe till my couſin Morden arrives: To whom, I think, I will write; and the rather, as Mr. Lovelace has aſſured me, that my friends have written to him to make good their ſide of the queſtion. 

But, with all my courage, I am exceedingly apprehenſiveabout Tueſday next, and about what may reſult from my ſtedfaſtneſs; for ſtedfaſt I am ſure I ſhall be. They are reſolved, I am told, to try every means to induce me to comply with what they are determin'd upon. I am reſolved to do the like, to avoid what they would force me to do. A dreadful contention between parents and child!—Each hopeing to leave the other without excuſe, whatever the conſequence may be. 

What can I do? Adviſe me, my dear! Something is ſtrangely wrong ſomewhere! to make parents, the moſt indulgent till now, ſeem cruel in a child's eye; and a daughter, till within theſe few weeks, thought unexceptionably dutiful, appear, in their judgment, a rebel!—O my ambitious and violent brother!—What may he have to anſwer for to both!— 

Be pleaſed to remember, my dear, that your laſt favour was dated on Saturday. This is Wedneſday: And none of mine have been taken away ſince, Don't let me wantyouradvice. My ſituation is extremely difficult.—But I am ſure you love me ſtill▪And not the leſs onthataccount. Adieu, my beloved friend. 

CL. HARLOWE.LETTER XX. MiſsHOWE,To MiſsCLARISSA HARLOWE.
Thurſday Morning, Day-break, March 30.AN accident has occaſioned my remiſſneſs, as, till you know it, you may juſtly think my ſilence. 

My mamma was ſent for on Sunday night, with the utmoſt earneſtneſs, by her couſin Larkin, whom I mentioned in one of my former. 

This poor woman was always afraid of Death, and was one of thoſe weak perſons who imagine that themaking of their Will muſt be an undoubted forerunner of it. 

She had always ſaid, when urged to the neceſſary work, That whenever ſhe made it, ſhe ſhould not live long after; and, one would think, imagined ſhe was under an obligation to prove her words: For, tho' ſhe had been long bed-rid, and was, in a manner, worn out before, yet ſhe thought herſelf better, till ſhe was perſuaded to make it: And from that moment, remembering what ſhe uſed to prognoſticate (herfears helping on what ſhe feared,as is often the caſe, particularly in the Small-Pox), grew worſe; and had it in her head once to burn her Will, in hopes to grow better upon it. 

She ſent my mamma word, That the Doctors had given her over: But that ſhe could not die till ſhe ſaw her. I told my mamma, That if ſhe wiſh'd her a chance for recovery, ſhe ſhould not, forthatreaſon, go. But go ſhe would; and, what was worſe, would make me go with her; and that, at an hour's warning [Had there been more time for argumentation, to be ſure I had not gone!] for ſhe ſaid nothing of it to me, till ſhe was riſing in the morningearly,reſolving to returnat night.So that there was a kind of neceſſity, that my preparation to obey her, ſhould, in a manner, accompany her command.—A command ſo much out of the way, on ſuch a ſolemn occaſion! And this I repreſented—But to no purpoſe:—There never was ſuch a contradicting girl in the world—Mywiſdom always madehera fool!—But ſhewouldbe obligedthis time,proper or improper. 

I have but one way of accounting for this ſudden whim of my mamma—She had a mind to accept of Mr. Hickman's offer to eſcorte her:—And I verily believe [I wiſh I were quite ſure of it] had a mind to oblige him with my company—as far as I know, to keep me out ofworſe. 

For, would you believe it,?—As ſure as you arealive, ſhe is afraid for her favourite Hickman, becauſe of the long viſit your Lovelace, tho' ſo much by accident, made me in her abſence, laſt time ſhe was at the ſame place. I hope, my dear,youare not jealous too. But, indeed, I now and then, when ſhe teazes me with praiſes which Hickman cannot deſerve, in return, fall to praiſing thoſe qualities and perſonalities in Lovelace, which the other never will have. Indeed I do love to teaze a little bit, that I do.—My mamma's girl!—I had like to have ſaid. 

As you know ſhe is as paſſionate, as I am pert, you will not wonder to be told, that we generally fall out on theſe occaſions: She flies from me, at the long run: It would be undutiful in me to leave herfirſt—And then I get an opportunity to purſue ourcorreſpondence. 

For, now I am rambling, let me tell you, that ſhe does not much favourthat;—fortworeaſons, I believe: One, that I don't ſhew her all that paſſes between us; the other, That ſhe thinks I harden your mind againſt your duty, as it is called; and withher,for a reaſon at home, as I have hinted more than once, parents cannot do wrong; children cannot oppoſe, and be right. This obliges me now-and-then toſtealan hour, as I may ſay, and not let her know how I am employ'd. 

You may gueſs from what I have written, how averſe I was to comply with this ſtretch of motherly authority, made ſo much againſt rhyme and reaſon.—But it came to be ateſt of duty; ſo I was obliged to yield, tho' with a full perſuaſion of being in the right. 

I have always your reproofs upon theſe occaſions: In your late letters ſtronger than ever. A good reaſon why, you'll ſay, Becauſe more deſerved than ever. I thank you kindly for your correction. I hope to makecor-rection of it—But let me tell you, thatyour ſtripe's, whether deſerved or not, have made me ſenſible deeper than the ſkin—But of this another time. 

It was Monday afternoon before we reached the old gentlewoman's. That fiddling, parading fellow, you know who I mean, made us wait for him two hours (and I to go a journey I diſliked!) only for the ſake of having a little more tawdry upon his houſings; which he had hurry'd his ſaddler to put on, to make him look fine, being to eſcorte his dear Madam Howe, and her fair daughter.—I told him, that I ſuppoſed he was afraid, that the double ſolemnity in the caſe, that of the viſit to a dying woman, and that of his own countenance, would give him the appearance of anundertaker; to avoid, which, he ran into as bad an extreme, and I doubted would be taken for amountebank. 

The man was confounded. He took it as ſtrongly, as if his conſcience gave aſſent to the juſtice of the remark.—Otherwiſe, he would have borne it better: For he is uſed enough to this ſort of treatment. I thought he would have cry'd. I have heretofore obſerved, that on this ſide of the contract, he ſeems to be a mighty meek ſort of creature.—And tho' I ſhould like it in himhereafter,perhaps, yet I can't help deſpiſing him a little in my heart for itnow.I believe, my dear, we all love your bluſtering fellows beſt; could we but direct the bluſter, and bid it roar when, and at whom, we pleaſed. 

The poor man looked at my mamma. She was ſo angry [My airs upon it, and my oppoſition to the journey, having all helped], that for half the way ſhe would not ſpeak to me. And when ſhe did, it was, I wiſh I had not brought you!—You know not what it is to condeſcend. It ismyfault, notMr. Hickman's, that you are here, ſo much againſt your will.—Have you no eyes for this ſide of the chariot? 

And then he far'd the better fromher,as he alwaysdoes, for faring worſe fromme:For there was, how do younow,Sir? And how do younow,Mr. Hickman? as he ambled now on this ſide of the chariot, now on that, ſtealing a prim look at me;herhead half out of the chariot, kindly ſmiling as if marry'd to the man but a fortnight herſelf: While I always ſaw ſomething to divert myſelf, on the ſide of the chariot where the honeſt man was not, were it but old Robin at a diſtance, on his Roan Keffel. 

Our courtſhip-days, they ſay, are our beſt days. Favour deſtroys courtſhip. Diſtance increaſes it. Its eſſence is diſtance. And to ſee how familiar theſe men-wretches grow upon a ſmile, what an awe they are ſtruck into when one frowns! Who would not make them ſtand off? Who would not enjoy a power, that is to be ſo ſhort-lived? 

Don't chide me one bit for this, my dear. It is in nature. I can't help it: Nay, for that matter, I love it, and wiſh not to help it. So ſpare your gravity, I beſeech you on this ſubject. I ſet not up for a perfect character. The man will bear it. And what need you care? My mamma over-balances all he ſuffers: And if he thinks himſelf unhappy, he ought never to be otherwiſe. 

Then, did he not deſerve a fit of the ſullens, think you, to make us loſe our dinner, for his parade, ſince in ſo ſhort a journey one would not bait, and loſe the opportunity of coming back that night, had the old gentlewoman's condition permitted it? To ſay nothing of being the cauſe, that my mamma was in the glout with her poor daughter all the way. 

At our alighting I gave him another dab; but it was but a little one. Yet the manner, and the air, made up (as I intended they ſhould) for that defect. My mamma's hand was kindly put into his, with a ſimpering altogether bridal; and with another, How do you now, Sir?—All his plump muſcles were in motion, and a double charge of care and obſequiouſneſsfidgetted up his whole form, when he offer'd to me his officious palm. My mamma, when I was a girl, always bid me hold up my head. I juſt then remember'd her commands, and was dutiful: I never held up my head ſo high. With an averted ſupercilious eye, and a rejecting hand, half-flouriſhing—I have no need of help, Sir!—You are in my way. 

He ran back, as if on wheels; with a face exceſſively mortify'd: I had thoughts elſe to have follow'd the too gentle touch, with a declaration, that I had as many hands and feet as himſelf: But this would have been telling him a piece of news, as to the latter, that I hope, he had not the preſumption to gueſs at. 

WE found the poor woman, as we thought, at the laſt gaſp. Had we comeſooner,we could not have got away, as we intended, that night. You ſee I am for excuſing the man all I can; and yet, I aſſure you, I have not ſo much as aconditional likingto him. My mamma ſat up moſt part of the night, expecting every hour would have been her poor couſin's laſt. I bore her company till two. 

I never ſaw the approaches of death in a grown perſon before; and was extremely ſhock'd. Death, to one in health, is a very terrible thing. We pity the perſon for whatſheſuffers: And we pity ourſelves for whatwemuſt ſome time hence, in like ſort, ſuffer; and ſo aredoublyaffected. 

She held out till Tueſday morning, eleven; and having told my mamma, that ſhe had left her an executrix, and her and me rings and mourning; we were employ'd all that day, in matters of the Will; [By which my couſin Jenny Fynnett is handſomely provided for]; ſo that it was Wedneſday morning early, before we ſet out on our return. 

It is true, we got home (having no houſings to ſtay for) by noon: But tho' I ſent Robin away beforehe alitt; and he brought me back a whole packet, down to the ſame Wedneſday noon; yet was I really ſo fatigued (and ſhock'd, as I muſt own, at the hard death of the old gentlewoman); my mamma likewiſe [who has no reaſon to diſlike this world] being indiſpoſed from the ſame occaſion; that I could not ſet about writing, time enough, for Robin's return that night. 

But having recruited my ſpirits, my mamma having alſo had a good night, I aroſe with the dawn, to write this, and get it diſpatched time enough for your breakfaſt-airing; that your ſuſpenſe may be as ſhort as poſſible. 

I WILL ſoon follow This with another. I will employ a perſon directly to find out how Lovelace behaves himſelf at his inn. Such a buſy ſpirit muſt be traceable. 

But, perhaps, my dear, you are indifferent now about him, or his employments; for this requeſt was made before hemortallyoffended you. Nevertheleſs, I will have inquiry made. The reſult, it is very probable, will be of uſe to confirm you in your preſent unforgiving temper.—And yet, if thepoorman [Shall I pity him foryou,my dear?] ſhould be depriv'd of the greateſt bleſſing any man on earth can receive, and which he has the preſumption, with ſo little merit, to aſpire to; he will have run great riſques; caught great colds; hazarded fevers; ſuſtained the higheſt indignities; brav'd the inclemencies of ſkies, and all for—nothing!—Will not this move yourgeneroſity(if nothing elſe) in his favour?—Poor Mr. Lovelace!— 

I would occaſion no throb; nor half-throb; no flaſh of ſenſibility, like lightning darting in, and as ſoon ſuppreſs'd, by a diſcretion that no one of the Sex ever before could give ſuch an example of—Iwould not,I ſay; and yet, for a trial ofyoutoyourſelf,rather than as an impertinent overflow of raillery in your friend, as money-takers try a ſuſpected guinea by theſound,let me, on ſuch a ſuppoſition, ſoundyou,by repeating,Poor Mr. Lovelace!— 

And now, my dear, how is it with you? How do you now, as my mamma ſays to Mr. Hickman, when her pert daughter has made him look ſorrowful? 

LETTER XXI. MiſsHOWE,To MiſsCLARISSA HARLOWE.
Thurſday Morning.I Will now take ſome notice of your laſt favour. But being ſo far behind-hand with you, muſt be brief. 

In the firſt place, as to your reproofs, thus ſhall I diſcharge myſelf of that part of my ſubject: Is it likely, think you, that I ſhould avoid deſerving them now-and-then, occaſionally, when I admire the manner in which you give me your rebukes, and love you the better for them? And when you are ſo wellintitledto give them? For what faults canyoupoſſibly have, unleſs your relations are ſo kind as to find you afewto keep theirmanyin countenance?—But, They are as kind tomein This, as toyou; for I may venture to affirm, That any one who ſhould readyourletters, and would ſay, you wereright,would not, on readingmine,condemn me for beingquite wrong. 

Your reſolution, not to leave your father's houſe, is right—if you can ſtay in it, and avoid being Solmes's wife. 

I think you anſwer'd Solmes's letter, asIſhould have anſwer'd it.—Will you not compliment me and yourſelf at once; by ſaying, thatThatwas right? 

You have, in your letters to your uncle, and the reſt, done all that you ought to do. You are wholly guiltleſs of the conſequence, be it what it will. To offer to give up your eſtate!—That would not I have done!—You ſee, this offer ſtagger'd them: They took time to conſider of it: They made my heart ake in the time they took: I was afraid they would have taken you at your word: And ſo, but for ſhame, and for fear of Lovelace, I dare ſay, they would.—You are too noble by half for them. This, I repeat, is an offer I would not have made. Let me beg of you, my dear, never to repeat the temptation to them. 

I freely own to you, that their uſage of you upon it, and Lovelace's different behaviour in his letter received at the ſame time, would have mademehis, paſt redemption. The duce take the man, I was going to ſay, for not having had ſo much regard to his character and morals, as would have intirely juſtify'd ſuch a ſtep in aClariſſa Harlowe,perſecuted as ſhe is! 

I wonder not at your appointment with him. I may further touch upon ſome part of this ſubject by-and-by. 

Pray, pray, I pray you now, my deareſt friend, contrive to ſend your Betty Barnes to me!—Does the Coventry-act extend to women, know ye?—The leaſt I would do, ſhould be, to ſend her home well ſouſed in, and dragged thro', our deepeſt horſe-pond. I'll engage, if I get her hither, that ſhe ſhall keep the anniverſary of her deliverance as long as ſhe lives. 

I wonder not at Lovelace's ſaucy anſwer, ſaucy as it really is. If he loves you as he ought, he muſt be vex'd at ſo great a diſappointment. The man muſt have been a deteſtable hypocrite, I think, had he not ſhewn his vexation. Your expectations of ſuch a Chriſtian command of temper in him, in a diſappointment of this nature eſpecially, are too early, byalmoſt half a century, in a man of his conſtitution. But, nevertheleſs, I am very far from blaming you for your reſentment. 

I ſhall be all impatience to know how this matter ends between you and him. But afew inches of brick-wallbetween you ſo lately; and now ſuchmountains!—And you think to hold it!—May be ſo!— 

You ſee the temper he ſhew'd in his preceding letter was notnaturalto him, you ſay. And did you before think itwas?Inſolent creepers and inſinuators! Inch-allow'd, ell-taking incroachers!—This very Hickman, I make no doubt, will be as ſaucy as your Lovelace, if ever he dare. He has not half the arrogant bravery of the other, and can better hide his horns; that's all. But whenever he has the power, depend upon it, he willbuttat one as valiantly as the other. 

If ever I ſhould be perſuaded to have him, I ſhall watch how the imperative Husbandcomes upon him; how the obſequious Lovergoes off; in ſhort, how heaſcends,and how Ideſcend,in the matrimonial wheel, never to take my turn again, but by fits and ſtarts, like the feeble ſtruggles of a ſinking ſtate for its dying liberty. 

All good-natured men are paſſionate,ſays Mr. Lovelace. A pretty plea to a beloved object in the plenitude of her power! As much as to ſay, Greatly as I value you, Madam, I will not take pains to curb my paſſions to oblige you.—Methinks, I ſhould be glad to hear from Mr. Hickman ſuch a plea for good-nature as this! 

Indeed, we are too apt to make allowances for ſuch tempers asearlyindulgence has made uncontroulable; and therefore habitually evil. But if a boiſtrous temper, when underobligation,is to be thus allowed for, what, when the tables are turned, will it expect? You know a husband, who, I fancy,had ſome of theſe early allowances made for him: And you ſee, that neither himſelf, nor any-body elſe, is the happier for it! 

The ſuiting of the tempers of two perſons who are to come together, is a great matter: And yet there ſhould be boundaries fixed between them, by conſent, as it were, beyond which neither ſhould go: And each ſhould hold the other to it; or there would probably be incroachments in both. If the boundaries of the Three Eſtates that conſtitute our Political Union were not known, and occaſionally aſſerted, what would become of each? The two branches of the Legiſlature would incroach upon each other; and the Executive power would ſwallow up both. 

If two perſons of diſcretion, you'll ſay, come tother— 

Ay, my dear, that's true: But, if none but perſons of diſcretion were to marry—And would it not ſurpriſe you if I were to advance, that the perſons of diſcretion are generally ſingle?—Such perſons are apt to conſider too much, to reſolve.—Are not you and I complimented as ſuch?—And would either of us marry, if the fellows, and our friends, would let us alone? 

But to the former point;—Had Lovelace made his addreſſes to me (unleſs, indeed, I had been taken with a liking for himmorethanconditional), I would have forbid him, upon the firſtpaſſionateinſtance of hisgood-nature,as he calls it, ever to ſee me more:'Thou muſt bear with me, honeſt friend, might I have ſaid (had I condeſcended to ſay any thing to him), an hundred times more than This:—Begone, therefore;—I bear with no paſſions that are predominant to That thou haſt pretended for me.' 

But to one ofyourmild and gentle temper, it would be all one, were you marry'd, whether the man be a Lovelace or a Hickman in his ſpirit.—You are ſo obediently principled, that perhaps you wouldhave told a mild man, that he muſt notintreat,butcommand; and that it was beneath him not to exact from you the obedience you had ſo ſolemnly vow'd to him at the altar.—I know of old, my dear, your meek regard to that little piddling part of the marriage-vow, which ſome prerogative-monger foiſted into the office, to make That aduty,which he knew was not aright. 

Our way of training-up,you ſay,makes us need the protection of the brave:Very true: And how extremely brave and gallant is it, that this brave man will free us from all inſults, but Thoſe which will go neareſt to us; that is to ſay, His own! 

How artfully has Lovelace, in the abſtract you give me of one of his letters, calculated to your meridian;Generous ſpirits hate compulſion!—He is certainly a deeper creature by much than once we thought him. He knows, as you intimate, that his own wild pranks cannot be concealed; and ſo owns juſt enough to palliate (becauſe it teaches you not to be ſurpriſed at) any new one, that may come to your ears; and then, truly, he is (however faulty) a mightyingenuousman; and by no means anhypocrite:A character, when found out, the moſt odious of all others, toour ſex,in theother; were it only becauſe it teaches us to doubt the juſtice of the praiſes ſuch a man gives us, when we are willing to believe them to be our due. 

By means of this ſuppoſedingenuity,Lovelace obtains a praiſe, inſtead of a merited diſpraiſe; and, like an abſolved confeſſionaire, wipes off, as he goes along, one ſcore, to begin another: For an eye favourable to him will not magnify his faults; nor will a woman, willing tohope the beſt,forbear to impute to ill-will and prejudice all t•at charity can make ſo imputable. And if ſhe even give credit to ſuch of the unfavourable imputations, as may be too flagrant to be doubted; ſhe will be very apt to take in thefuture hope,which he inculcates, and which to queſtion would be to queſtion her own power, and perhapsmerit:And thus may a woman be inclined to make aſlight,or even afancied,virtue atone for the moſtglaringvice. 

I have a reaſon, a new one, for this preachment upon a text you have given me. But, till I am better inform'd, I will not explain myſelf. If it come out, as I ſhrewdly ſuſpect it will, the man, my dear, is a devil; and you muſt rather think of—I proteſt I had like to have ſaid—Solmes,than him. 

But let This be as it will, ſhall I tell you, how, after all his offences, he may creep in with you again? 

I will.—Thus then: It is but to claim for himſelf thegood-natur'd character:And This, granted, will blot out the fault ofpaſſionateinſolence: And ſo he will have nothing to do, but This hour to accuſtom you to inſult; the Next, to bring you to forgive him, upon his ſubmiſſion: The conſequence will be, that he will, by this ſee-ſaw teazing, break your reſentment all to pieces: And then, a littlemoreof the inſult, and a littleleſsof the ſubmiſſion, on his part, will go down, till nothing elſe but thefirſtwill be ſeen, and not a bit of theſecond:You will then be afraid to provoke ſo offenſive a ſpirit; and at laſt will be brought ſoprettily,and ſoaudibly,to pronounce the little reptile word OBEY, that it will do one's heart good to hear you. TheMuſcovitewife takes place of themanagedmiſtreſs.—And; if you doubt the progreſſion, be pleaſed, my dear, to take yourmamma's judgment upon it. 

But no more of This just now. Your ſtory is become too arduous to dwell upon theſe ſort of topics. And yet this is but anaffected levitywith me. My heart, as I have heretofore ſaid, is a ſincere ſharer in all your diſtreſſes. My ſunſhine darts but thro' a drizly cloud. My eye, were you to ſee it, when it ſeems to you ſogladden'd,as you mention in a former, is more than ready to overflow, even at thevery paſſages, perhaps, upon which you impute to me thearchneſsofexultation. 

But now the unheard of cruelty and perverſeneſs of ſome of your friends[Relations,I ſhould ſay; I am always blundering thus!]; theasſtrange determinedneſs of others; your preſent quarrel with Lovelace; and your approaching interview with Solmes, from which you are right to apprehend a great deal; are ſuch conſiderable circumſtances in your ſtory, that it is fit they ſhould ingroſs all my attention. 

You aſk me to adviſe you how to behave upon Solmes's viſit. Icannotfor my life. I know they expect a great deal from it: You had not elſe had your long day comply'd with. All I will ſay is, That if Solmes cannot be prevailed for, now, that Lovelace has ſo much offended you, he never will. When the interview is over, I doubt not but that I ſhall have reaſon to ſay, that All you did, that All you ſaid, was right, and could not be better: Yet, if I don't think ſo, I won't ſay ſo; that I promiſe you. 

Only, let me adviſe you, to pull up a ſpirit, even to your uncle, if there be occaſion. Reſent the vile and fooliſh treatment you meet with, in which he has taken ſo large a ſhare, and make him aſham'd of it, if you can. 

I know not, upon recollection, but This interview may be a good thing for you, however deſign'd. For when Solmes ſees (if that is tobeſo), that it is impoſſible he ſhould ſucceed with you; and your relations ſee it too; the one muſt, I think, recede, and the other come to terms with you; upon offers, that it is my opinion, will go hard enough with you to comply with; when theſtillharder are diſpenſed with. 

There are ſeveral paſſages in your laſt letters, as well as in your former, which authorize me to ſay This. But it would be unſeaſonable to touch this ſubject further juſt now. 

But, upon the whole, I have no patience to ſee you thus made the ſport of your brother's and ſiſter's cruelty: For what, after ſo much ſteadineſs on your part, in ſo many trials, can be their hope? 

I approve of your intention to ſend out of their reach all the letters and papers you would not have them ſee. Methinks, I would wiſh you to depoſite likewiſe a parcel of cloaths, linen, &c. before your interview with Solmes; leſt you ſhould not have an opportunity for it afterwards. Robin ſhall fetch it away on the firſt orders, by day or by night. 

I am in hopes to procure from my mamma, if things come to extremity, leave for you to be privately with us. 

I will condition to be good-humour'd, and evenkind,to HER favourite, if ſhe will ſhew me an indulgence, that ſhall make me ſerviceable to MINE. It has been a good while in my head. But I cannot promiſe that I ſhall ſucceed in it. 

Don't abſolutely deſpair, however, my dear. Your quarrel with Lovelace may be a help to it. And the offers you made, in your anſwer to your uncle Harlowe's letter of Sunday night laſt, may be another. 

I depend upon your forgiveneſs of all the, perhaps unſeaſonable, flippancies of your naturally too lively, yet moſt ſincerely ſympathizing, 

ANNA HOWE.LETTER XXII. MiſsCLARISSA HARLOWE,To MiſsHOWE.
Friday, March 31.YOU have very kindly accounted for your ſilence. People in misfortune are always in doubt. They are too apt to turn even unavoidable accidents into ſlights and neglects; eſpecially in thoſe whoſe favourable opinion they wiſh to preſerve. 

I am ſure I ought evermore to exempt my Anna Howe from the ſuppoſed poſſibility of her becoming one of thoſe who baſk only in the ſunſhine of a friend: But nevertheleſs her friendſhip is too precious to me, not to doubt my own merits on the one hand, and not to be anxious for the preſervation of it, on the other. 

You ſo generouſly give me liberty to chide you, that I am afraid of taking it, becauſe I could ſooner miſtruſt my own judgment, than that of a beloved friend, whoſe ingenuity in acknowleging animputederror, ſets her above the commiſſion of awilfulone. This makes me half afraid to aſk you, If you think you are not too cruel, tooungenerousſhall I ſay, in your behaviour to a man who loves you ſo dearly, and is ſo worthy and ſo ſincere a man? 

Only it is by YOU, or I ſhould be aſham'd to be outdone in that true magnanimity, which makes one thankful for the wounds given by a true friend. I believe I was guilty of a petulance, which nothing but my uneaſy ſituation can excuſe; ifthatcan. I am almoſtafraidto beg of you, and yet I repeatedlydo,to give way to that charming ſpirit, whenever it riſes to your pen, which ſmiles, yet goes to the quick of one's fault. What patient ſhall be afraid of a probe in ſo delicate a hand?—I ſay, I am almoſt afraid to pray you to give way to it, for fear you ſhould, for that very reaſon, reſtrain it. For the edge may he taken off, if it does not make the ſubject of its raillery wince a little.Permittedordeſiredſatire may be apt, in a generous ſatiriſt, mending as it raillies, to turn too ſoon into panegyric. Yours is intended to inſtruct; and tho' it bites, it pleaſes at the ſame time: No fear of a wound's rankling or feſtering by ſo delicate a point, as you carry; not invenom'd byperſonality,not intending to expoſe, or ridicule, or exaſperate.—The moſt admired of our moderns know nothing of this art; Why? Becauſe it muſt be foundedin good-nature, and directed by a right heart. Theman,not thefault,is the ſubject oftheirſatire: And were it to bejuſt,how ſhould it beuſeful?How ſhould it anſwer any good purpoſe? When every gaſh (for their weapon is a Broad-ſword, not a Lancet) lets in the air of public ridicule, and exaſperates where it ſhould heal. Spare me not therefore, becauſe I am yourfriend.Forthatvery reaſon ſpare me not. I mayfeelyour edge, fine as it is; I may be pained: You would loſe your end if I were not: But after the firſt ſenſibility (as I have ſaid more than once before), I will love you the better, and my amended heart ſhall be all yours; and it will then be more worthy to be yours. 

You have taught me what to ſay to, and what to think of, Mr. Lovelace. You have, by agreeable anticipation, let me know how it is probable he will apply to me to be excus'd. I will lay every thing before you that ſhall paſs on the occaſion, if hedoesapply, that I may take your advice, when it can come in time; and when it cannot, that I may receive your correction, or approbation, as I may happen to merit either.—Only one thing muſt be allow'd for me; that whatever courſe I ſhall bepermittedor heforcedto ſteer, I muſt be conſidered, as a perſon out of her own direction. Toſt to and fro, by the high winds of paſſionate controul, and, as I think, unreaſonable ſeverity, I behold the deſired Port, theſingle ſtate,which I would fain ſteer into; but am kept off by the foaming billows of a brother's and ſiſter's envy; and by the raging winds of a ſuppoſed invaded authority; while I ſee in Lovelace, the Rocks on one hand, and in Solmes, the Sands on the other; and tremble, leſt I ſhould ſplit upon the former, or ſtrike upon the latter. 

But you, my better pilot, what a charming hope do you bid me aſpire to, if things come to extremity!—I will not, as you caution me, too muchdepend upon your ſucceſs with your mamma, in my favour: For well I know her high notions of implicit duty in a child.—But yet I willhopetoo;—becauſe her ſeaſonable protection may ſave me perhaps from a greater raſhneſs: And, in This caſe, ſee ſhall direct all my ways: I will do nothing but by her orders, and by her advice and yours: Not ſee any-body: Not write to any-body: Nor ſhall any living ſoul, but by her direction and yours, know where I am. In any cottage place me, I will never ſtir out, unleſs, diſguiſed as your ſervant, I am now-and-then permitted an evening-walk with you: And this private protection to be granted me for no longer time than till my couſin Morden comes; which, as I hope, cannot be long. 

I am afraid I muſt not venture to take the hint you give me, to depoſite ſome of my cloaths; altho' I will ſome of my linen, as well as papers. 

I will tell you why. Betty had for ſome time been very curious about my wardrobe, whenever I took out any of my things before her. 

Obſerving this, I once left my keys in the locks, on taking one of my garden-airings; and on my return, ſurpriſed the creature with her hand upon the keys, as if ſhutting the door. 

She was confounded at my ſudden coming back. I took no notice: But, on her retiring, I found my cloaths did not lie in the uſual order. 

I doubted not, upon this, that her curioſity was an effect of their orders to her; and being afraid they would abridge me of my airings, if their ſuſpicions were not obviated, it has ever since been my custom (among other contrivances), not only to leave my keys in the locks; but to employ the wench now-and-then, in taking out my cloaths, ſuit by ſuit, on pretence of preventing their being rumpled or creaſed, and to ſee that the flower'd ſilver ſuit did not tarniſh; ſometimes declaredly as a wile-away-time, having littleelſe to do: With which employment (ſuper-added to the delight taken by the low as well as the high of our ſex in ſeeing fine cloaths) ſhe ſeem'd always, I thought, as well pleaſed, as if it anſwer'd one of the offices ſhe had in charge. 

To this, and to the confidence they have in a ſpy ſo diligent, and to their knowing, that I have not one confidante in a family, where, I believe, nevertheleſs, every ſervant in it loves me; nor have attempted to make one; I ſuppoſe, I owe the freedom I enjoy of my airings: And, perhaps (finding I make no movements towards going off), they are the more ſecure, that I ſhall at laſt be prevailed upon to comply with their meaſures: Since they muſt think, that, otherwiſe, they give me provocations enough to take ſome raſh ſtep, in order to free myſelf from a treatment ſo diſgraceful; and which (God forgive me, if I judge amiſs!), I am afraid my brother and ſiſter would not be ſorry to drive me to take. 

If therefore ſuch a ſtep ſhould become neceſſary (which I yet hope will not!) I muſt be contented to go away with the cloaths I ſhall have on at the time. My cuſtom to be dreſs'd for the day, as ſoon as breakfaſt is over, when I have had no houſhold-employments to prevent me, will make ſuch a ſtep, if I am forced to take it, leſs ſuſpected. And the linen I ſhall depoſite, in purſuance of your kind hint, cannot be miſs'd. 

This cuſtom, altho' a priſoner, as I may too truly ſay, and neither viſited nor viſiting, I continue. One owes toone's-ſelf,and to one'sſex,you know, to be always neat; and never to be ſurpriſed in a way one ſhould be pained to be ſeen in. 

Beſides, people in adverſity, which is the ſtate of trial of every good quality, ſhould endeavour to preſerve laudable cuſtoms, that, if ſunſhine return, they may not be loſers by their trial. 

Does it not, moreover, manifeſt a firmneſs of mind, in an unhappy perſon, to keep hope alive? 

Tohopefor better days, is half todeſervethem: For could we have juſt ground for ſuch a hope, if we did not reſolve to deſerve what that hope bids us aſpire to?—Then, who ſhall befriend a perſon who forſakes herſelf?—Theſe are reflections by which I ſometimes endeavour to ſupport myſelf. 

I know you don't deſpiſe mygrave airs,altho' (with a view, no doubt, to irradiate my mind in my misfortunes) you railly me upon them. Every-body has not your talent of introducing ſerious and important leſſons, in ſuch a happy manner, as at once to delight and inſtruct. 

What a multitude of contrivances may not young people fall upon, if the mind be not engaged by acts of kindneſs and condeſcenſion! I am not uſed by my friends, of late, as I always uſed their ſervants. 

When I was intruſted with the family-management, I always found it both generous and juſt, to repoſe a truſt in them. Not to ſeem to expect or depend upon juſtice from them, is, in a manner, to bid them take opportunities, whenever they offer, to beun-juſt. 

Mr. Solmes (to expatiate a little on this low, but not unuſeful, ſubject), in his more trifling ſolicitudes, would have had a ſorry key-keeper in me. Were I miſtreſs of a family, I would not either take to myſelf, or give to ſervants, the pain of keeping thoſe I had reaſon to ſuſpect. People low in ſtation have often minds not ſordid.—Nay, I have ſometimes thought, that, even take number for number, there are morehoneſt low people,thanhoneſt high.In the one, honeſty is theirchiefpride. In the other, the love of power, of grandeur, of pleaſure, miſlead; and that love, and their ambition, induce a paramount pride, which too often ſwallows up the more laudable one. 

Many of the former would ſcorn to deceive a confidence. But I have ſeen, among the moſt ignorant of their claſs, a ſuſceptibility of reſentment, if their honeſty has been ſuſpected: And have more than once been forced to put a ſervant right, whom I have heard ſay, That, altho' ſhe valued herſelf upon herhoneſty,no maſter or miſtreſs ſhould ſuſpect her for nothing. 

How far has the compariſon I had in my head, between my friends treatment ofme,and my treatment of theirſervants,carried me! But we always allowed ourſelves to expatiate on ſuch ſubjects, whether low or high, that might tend to inlarge our minds, or mend our management, whether notional or practical, and whether they reſpected our preſent, or might reſpect our probable future ſituations. 

What I was principally leading to, was to tell you, how ingenious I am in my contrivances and pretences to blind my gaolereſs, and to take off the jealouſy of her principals, on my going down ſo often into the garden and poultry-yard. People ſuſpiciouſly treated never, I believe, want invention. Sometimes I wantair,and am better the moment I am out of my chamber—Sometimesſpririts; and then my Bantams and Pheaſants, or the Caſcade, divert me; the former, by their inſpiriting livelineſs; the latter, more ſolemnly, by its echoing daſhings, and hollow murmurs.—Sometimes, ſolitude is of all things my wiſh, and the awful ſilence of the night, the ſpangled element, and the riſing and ſetting ſun, how promotive of contemplation!—Sometimes, when I intend nothing, and expect not letters, I am officious to take Betty with me; and at others, beſpeak her attendance, when I know ſhe is otherwiſe employ'd, and cannot give it me. 

Theſe more capital artifices I branch out into leſſer ones, without number. Yetallhave not only the face of truth, but are real truth; altho' not the principalmotive. How prompt a thing iswill!What impediments doesdiſlikefurniſh!—How ſwiftly, thro' every difficulty, do we move with the one!—How tardily with the other!—Every trifling obſtruction weighing one down, as if lead were faſtened to our feet! 

Friday Morning, Eleven o'Clock.I HAVE already made up my parcel of linen; my heart aked all the time I was employ'd about it; and ſtill akes, at the thoughts of its being a neceſſary precaution. 

When it comes to your hands, as I hope it ſafely will, you will be pleaſed to open it. You will find in it two parcels ſealed up; one of which contains the letters you have not yet ſeen; being thoſe written ſince I left you; in the other are all the letters, and copies of letters, that have paſſed between you and me, ſince I was laſt with you; with ſome other papers, on ſubjects ſo much above me, that I cannot wiſh them to be ſeen by any-body whoſe indulgence I am not ſo ſure of, as I am of yours. If my judgment ripen with my years, perhaps I may review them. 

Mrs. Norton uſed to ſay, from her reverend Father, that there was one time of life forimaginationandfancyto work in: Then, were the writer to lay by his works tillriper yearsandexperienceſhould direct the fire rather toglow,than toflame out; ſomething between both, might, perhaps, be produced, that would not diſpleaſe a judicious eye. 

In a third diviſion, folded up ſeparately, are all Mr. Lovelace's letters, ſince he was forbidden this houſe, and copies of my anſwers to them. I expect that you will break the ſeals of this parcel, and when you have peruſed them all, give me your free opinion of my conduct. 

By the way, not a line from that man!—Not oneline!—Wedneſday I depoſited mine. It remained there on Wedneſday night. What time it was taken away yeſterday I cannot tell. For I did not concern myſelf about it, till towards night; and then it was not there. No return at ten this day. I ſuppoſe he is as much out of humour, as I. With all my heart! 

He may be mean enough, perhaps, if ever I ſhould put it into hispower,to avenge himſelf for the trouble he has had with me.—But that now, I dare ſay, I never ſhall. 

I ſee what ſort of a man the incroacher is,—And I hope we are equally ſick of one another!—My heart isvexedly-eaſy, if I may ſo deſcribe it.Vexedly—becauſe of the apprehended interview with Solmes, and the conſequences it may have: Or elſe I ſhould bequiteeaſy; for why? I have notdeſervedthe uſage I receive:—And could I be rid of Solmes, as I preſume I am of Lovelace,theirinfluence over my father, mother, and uncles againſt me, could not hold. 

The five guineas ty'd up in one corner of a handkerchief under the linen, I beg you will let paſs, as an acknowlegement for the trouble I give your truſty ſervant. You muſt not chide me, my dear. You know I cannot be eaſy, unleſs I have my way, in theſe little matters. 

I was going to put up what little money I have, and ſome of my ornaments; but they are portable, and I cannot forget them. Beſides, ſhould they, ſuſpecting me, deſire to ſee any of the jewels, and were I not able to produce them, it would amount to a demonſtration of an intention, which would have a guilty appearance to them. 

Friday, One o'Clock,in the Woodhouſe.No letter yet from this man!—I have luckily depoſited my parcel, and have your letter of laſt night.If Robert takes This without the parcel, pray let him return immediately for it. But he cannot miſs it, I think; and muſt conclude that it is put there for him to take away.—You may believe, from the contents of yours, that I ſhall immediately write again.— 

CL. HARLOWE.LETTER XXIII. MiſsHOWE,To MiſsCLARISSA HARLOWE.
Thurſday Night, March 30.THE fruits of my inquiry after your abominable wretch's behaviour and baſeneſs, at the paltry ale-houſe, which he calls an inn; prepare to hear. 

Wrens and Sparrows are not too ignoble a quarry for this villainous goſhawk!—His aſſiduities; his watchings; his nightly riſques; the inclement weather he travels in; muſt not be all placed toyouraccount. He has opportunities of making every thing right to him of that ſort. A ſweet pretty girl, I am told:—Innocent till he went thither—Now!—Ah! poor girl!—who knows what? 

But juſt turn'd of Seventeen!—His friend and brother Rake; a man of humour and intrigue, as I am told, to ſhare the ſocial bottle with. And ſometimes another diſguiſed Rake or two. No ſorrow comes near their hearts. Be not diſturbed, my dear, at hishearſeneſſes.His pretty Betſey, his Roſe-bud, as the vile wretch calls her, canhearall he ſays. 

He is very fond of her. They ſay ſhe is innocent even yet!—Her father, her grandmother, believe her to be ſo. He is to fortune her out to a young lover!—Ah! the poor young lover!—Ah! the poor ſimple girl! 

Mr. Hickman tells me, that he heard in town, that he uſed to be often at Plays, and at the Opera, with women; and every time with a different one!—Ah! my ſweet friend!—But I hope he is nothing to you,if all this were truth—But this intelligence will do his buſineſs, if you had been ever ſo good friends before. 

A vile wretch! Cannot ſuch purity in purſuit, in view, reſtrain him? But I leave him to you!—There can be no hope of him. More of a fool, than of ſuch a one. Yet I wiſh I may be able to ſnatch the poor young creature out of his villainous paws. I have laid a ſcheme to do ſo; ifindeedſhe is hitherto innocent and heart-free. 

He appears to the people as a military man, in diſguiſe, ſecreting himſelf on account of a duel fought in town; the adverſary's life in ſuſpenſe. They believe he is a great man. His friend paſſes for an inferior officer; upon a foot of freedom with him: He, accompany'd by a third man, who is a ſort of ſubordinate companion to the ſecond. The wretch himſelf but with one ſervant. O my dear! How pleaſantly can theſe devils, as I muſt call them, paſs their time, while our gentle boſoms heave with pity for their ſuppoſed ſufferings for us! 

I AM juſt now inform'd, that, at my deſire, I ſhall ſee this girl, and her father: I will ſift them thoroughly. I ſhall ſoon find out ſuch a ſimple thing as This, if he has not corrupted her already—And if he has, I ſhall ſoon find that out too.—If more Art than Nature in either her or her father, I ſhall give them both up—But, depend upon it, the girl's undone. 

He is ſaid to be fond of her.—He places her at the upper end of his table—He ſets her a-pratling.—He keeps his friend at a diſtance from her.—She prates away.—He admires for nature all ſhe ſays.—Once was heard to call her charming little creature!—An hundred has he called ſo no doubt.—Puts her upon ſinging—Praiſes her wild note.—O my dear, the girl's undone!—muſt be undone!—Theman, you know, is LOVELACE-Let 'em bring Wyerley to you, if they will-have you marry'd—Any-body but Solmes and Lovelace be yours!—So adviſes 

Your ANNA HOWE.My deareſt friend, conſider this ale-houſe as his gariſon. Him as an enemy. His brother-rakes as his aſſiſtants and abetters: Would not your brother, would not your uncles, tremble, if they knew how near them, as they paſs to and fro!—I am told, he is reſolv'd you ſhall not be carry'd to your uncle Antony's,—What can you do,with,orwithoutſuch an enterprizing— 

Fill up the blank I leave.—I cannot find a word bad enough. 

LETTER XXIV. MiſsCLARISSA HARLOWE,To MiſsHOWE.
Friday, Three o'Clock.YOU incenſe, alarm, and terrify me, at the ſame time! Haſten, my deareſt friend, haſten to me, what further intelligence you can gather about this vileſt of men! 

But never talk of innocence, of ſimplicity, and this unhappy girl together! Muſt ſhe not know, that ſuch a man as That, dignify'd in his very aſpect; and no diſguiſe able to conceal his being of condition—muſt mean too much, when he places her at the upper end of his table, and calls her by ſuch tender names?—Would a girl, modeſt as ſimple, above Seventeen, be ſet a ſinging at the pleaſure of ſuch a man as That? A ſtranger? and profeſſedly in diſguiſe!—Would her father and grandmother, if honeſt people, and careful of their ſimple girl, permit ſuch freedoms? 

Keep his friend at diſtance from her!—To be ſure hisdeſignsare villainous, if they have not been already effected. 

Warn, my dear, if not too late, the unthinking father, of his child's danger.—There cannot be a father in the world, who would ſell his child's virtue.—No mother!—The poor thing! 

I long to hear the reſult of your intelligence. You ſhallſeethe ſimple creature, you tell me.—Let me know what ſort of a girl it is.—Aſweet pretty girl,you ſay.—Aſweetprettygirl,my dear!—They are ſweet, pretty words from your pen. But are theyyours,orhis,of her?—If ſhe be ſo ſimple, if ſhe have Eaſe and Nature in her manner, in her ſpeech, and warbles prettily herwild notes[How affectingly you mention this ſimple Thing, my dear!] why, ſuch a girl as That, muſt engage ſuch a profligate wretch, as now, indeed, I doubt this man is; accuſtom'd, perhaps, to town-women, and their confident ways!—Muſtdeeply,and for along ſeaſon,engage him! Since, perhaps, when her innocence is departed, ſhe will endeavour by art to ſupply the natural charms that engaged him. 

Fine hopes of ſuch a wretch's reformation!—I would not, my dear, for the world, have any thing to ſay—But I need not make reſolutions.—I have not open'd, nor will I open, his letter.—A ſycophant creature!—With his hoarſeneſſes—got, perhaps, by a midnight revel, ſinging to his wild-note ſinger.—And only increaſed in the coppice! 

To be already on a foot!—In his eſteem, I mean, my dear.—For myſelf, I deſpiſe him.—I hate myſelf almoſt for writing ſo much abouthim,and of ſuch a ſimpleton asThis ſweet pretty girl:But nothing can be eitherſweetorpretty,that is not modeſt, that is not virtuous. 

This vile Joſeph Leman had given a hint to Betty, and ſhe to me, as if Lovelace would be found outto be a very bad man, at a place where he had been lately ſeen in diſguiſe. But he would ſee further, he ſaid, before he told her more; and ſhe promiſed ſecrecy, in hope to get at further intelligence. I thought it could be no harm, to get you to inform yourſelf, and me, of what could be gather'd. And now I ſee, his enemies are but too well warranted in their reports of him: And, if the ruin of this poor young creature is his aim, and if he had not known her, but for his viſits to Harlowe-place, I ſhall have reaſon to be doubly concerned for her; and doubly incenſed againſt ſo vile a man. I think I hate him worſe than I do Solmes himſelf.—But I will not add one other word about him; after I have wiſhed to know, as ſoon as poſſible, what further occurs from your inquiry;—becauſe I ſhall not open his letter till then; and becauſe then, if it come out, as I dare ſay it will, I'll directly put the letter unopen'd into the place I took it from, and never trouble myſelf more about him. Adieu, my deareſt friend. 

CL. HARLOWE.LETTER. XXV. MiſsHOWE,To MiſsCLARISSA HARLOWE.
Friday Noon, March 31.JUSTICE obliges me to forward This after my laſt, on the wings of the wind, as I may ſay.—I really believe the man is innocent. Of thisoneaccuſation, I think, he muſt be acquitted; and I am ſorry I was ſo forward in diſpatching away my intelligence by halves. 

I have ſeen the girl. She is really a very pretty, a very neat, and what is ſtill a greater beauty, a very innocent young creature. He who could have ruin'd ſuch an undeſigning home-bred, muſt have been indeedinfernally wicked. Her father is an honeſt ſimple man; intirely ſatisfy'd with his child, and with her new acquaintance. 

I am almoſt afraid for your heart, when I tell you, that I find, now I have got to the bottom of this inquiry, ſomething noble come out in this Lovelace's favour. 

The girl is to be marry'd next week; and This promoted and brought about by him. He is reſolv'd, her father ſays, to make one couple happy, and wiſhes he could make more ſo. [There's for you, my dear!] And having taken a liking alſo to the young fellow whom ſhe profeſſes to love, he has given her an hundred pounds: The grandmother actually has it in her hands, to anſwer to the like ſum, given to the youth by one of his own relations: While Mr. Lovelace's companion, attracted by the example, has preſented twenty-five guineas to the father, who is poor, towards cloaths to equip the pretty Ruſtic. 

They were deſirous, the poor man ſays, when they firſt came, of appearing beneath themſelves; but now he knows the one (but mention'd it in confidence) to be Colonel Barrow, the other Capt. Sloane. The Colonel he owns, was at firſt, veryſweet upon his girl:But upon her grandmother's begging of him to ſpare her innocence, he vow'd, that he never would offer any thing but good counſel to her; and had kept to his word: And the pretty fool acknowleged, that ſhe never could have been better inſtructed by the miniſter himſelf from theBible-Book!—The girl, I own, pleaſed me ſo well, that I made her viſit to me worth her while. 

But what, my dear, will become of us now?—Lovelace not only reform'd, but turn'd preacher!—What will become of us now?—Why, my ſweet friend, yourgeneroſityis now engaged in his favour!—Fie, upon thisGeneroſity!—I think in my heart, that it does as much miſchief to the noble-minded,asLoveto the ignobler.—What before was only aconditional liking,I am now afraid will turn toliking unconditional. 

I could not endure to turn my invective into panegyric all at once, and ſo ſoon. We, or ſuch as I, at leaſt, love to keep ourſelves in countenance for a raſh judgment, even when we know it to be raſh. Every-body has not your generoſity in confeſſing a miſtake. It requires a greatneſs of ſoul to do it. So I made ſtill farther inquiry after his life and manners, and behaviour there, in hopes to find ſomething bad: But all uniform! 

Upon the Whole, Mr. Lovelace comes out with ſo much advantage from this inquiry, that were there the leaſt room for it, I ſhould ſuſpect the whole to be a plot ſet on foot to waſh a blackmoor white. Adieu, my dear. 

ANNA HOWE.LETTER XXVI. MiſsCLARISSA HARLOWE,To MiſsHOWE.
Saturday, April 1.HASTY cenſurers do indeed ſubject themſelves to the charge of variableneſs and inconſiſtency in judgment: And ſo they ought; for, if you, even you, were really ſo loth to own a miſtake, as, in the inſtance before us, you pretend to ſay you were, I believe I ſhould not have loved you ſo well as I really do love you. Nor could you, my dear, have ſo frankly thrown the reflection I hint at, upon yourſelf, had you not had one of the moſt ingenuous minds that ever woman boaſted. 

Mr. Lovelace has faults enow to deſerve very ſevere cenſure, altho' he be not guilty of this. If I were upon ſuch terms with him, as he would wiſh me to be, I ſhould give him a hint, that this treacherousJoſeph Leman cannot be ſo much his friend, as perhaps he thinks him. If he had, he would not have been ſo ready to report to his diſadvantage (and to Betty Barnes too) this ſlight affair of the pretty Ruſtic. Joſeph has engaged Betty to ſecrecy; promiſing to let her, and her young maſter too, know more, when he knows the whole of the matter: And this hinders her from mentioning it, as ſhe is nevertheleſs agog to do, to my ſiſter or my brother. And then ſhe does not chooſe to diſoblige Joſeph; for altho' ſhe pretends to look above him, ſhe liſtens, I believe, to ſome love-ſtories he tells her. Women having it not in their power tobegina courtſhip, ſome of them very frequently, I believe, lend anearwhere theirheartsincline not. 

But to ſay no more of theſe low people, neither of whom I think tolerably of; I muſt needs own, that as I ſhould for ever have deſpiſed this man, had he been capable of ſuch a vile intrigue in his way to Harlowe-place; and as I believed hewascapable of it, it has indeed engaged mygeneroſity,as you call it, in proportion (—Iownit has—) in his favour: Perhaps more than I may have reaſon to wiſh it had. And, railly me, as you will, pray tell me fairly, my dear, would it not have had ſuch an effect upon you? 

Then the real generoſity of the act.—I proteſt, my beloved friend, if he would be good for the reſt of his life from this time, I would forgive him a great many of his paſt errors, were it only for the demonſtration he has given in This, that he iscapableof ſo good and bountiful a manner of thinking. 

You may believe I made no ſcruple to open his letter, after the receipt of your ſecond on this ſubject: Nor ſhall I of anſwering it, as I have no reaſon to find fault with it: An article in his favour, procured him, however, ſo much the eaſier (as I muſt own) by way of amends for the undue diſpleaſure I took againſt him; tho' he knows it not. 

It is lucky enough that this matter was cleared upto me by your friendly diligence ſo ſoon: For had I wrote at all before that, it would have been to reinforce my diſmiſſion of him; and perhaps the very motive mentioned; for it had affected me more than I think it ought: And then, what an advantage would that have given him, when he could have clear'd up the matter ſo happily for himſelf? 

When I ſend you This letter of his, you will ſee how very humble he is: What acknowlegements of natural impatience: What confeſſion of faults, as you prognoſticated. A very different appearance, I muſt own, all theſe make, now the ſtory of the pretty Ruſtic is clear'd up, than they would have made, had it not.—And, methinks too, my dear, I can allow the girl to be prettier than before I could, tho' I never ſaw her—ForVirtueis Beauty in perfection. 

You will ſee how he accounts to me, thro' indiſpoſition,'that he could not come for my letter in perſon; and he labours the point, as if he thought I ſhould be uneaſy that he did not.'I am ſorry he ſhould be ill on my account; and I will allow, that the ſuſpenſe he has been in, for ſome time paſt, muſt have been vexatious enough to ſo impatient a ſpirit. But all is owing originally to himſelf. 

You will find him (in the preſumption of being forgiven)'full of contrivances and expedients for my eſcaping the compulſion threatened me.' 

I have always ſaid, that next to being without fault, is the acknowlegement of a fault; ſince no amendment can be expected, where an error is defended: But you will ſee, in this very letter, an haughtineſs even in his ſubmiſſions. 'Tis true, I know not where to find fault, as to the expreſſion, yet cannot I be ſatisfy'd, that his humilityishumility; or even an humility upon ſuch conviction as one ſhould be pleaſed with. 

To be ſure, he is far from being a polite man: Yet is he not directly and characteriſticallyun-polite.Buthisis ſuch a ſort of politeneſs, as has, by a careleſſneſs founded on a very early indulgence, and perhaps on too much ſucceſs in riper years, and an arrogance built upon both, grown into aſſuredneſs, and, of courſe, as I may ſay, into indelicacy. 

The diſtance you recommend, at which to keep this ſex, is certainly right in the main: Familiarity deſtroys reverence: But with whom?—Not with thoſe, ſurely, who are prudent, grateful, and generous. 

But it is very difficult for perſons, who would avoid running into one extreme, to keep clear of another. Hence Mr. Lovelace, perhaps, thinks it the mark of a great ſpirit to humour his pride, tho' at the expence of delicacy: But can the man be a deep man, who knows not how to make ſuch diſtinctions, as a perſon of moderate parts cannot miſs? 

He complains heavily of my'readineſs to take mortal offence at him, and to diſmiſs him for ever: It is ahighconduct, he ſays he muſt be ſincere enough to tell me; and what muſt be very far from contributing to allay his apprehenſions of the poſſibility that I may be perſecuted into my relations meaſures in behalf of Mr. Solmes.' 

You will ſee how he puts his preſent and his future happineſs,'with regard to both worlds, intirely upon me.'The ardour with which he vows and promiſes, I think the heart only can dictate: How elſe can any one gueſs at a man's heart? 

You'll alſo ſee,'that he has already heard of the interview I am to have with Mr. Solmes;'and with what vehemence and anguiſh he expreſſes himſelf on the occaſion.— I intend to take proper notice of the ignoble means he ſtoops to, to come at his early intelligence out of our family. If perſons pretending to principle, bear not their teſtimony againſt unprincipled actions, who ſhall check them? 

You'll ſee, how paſſionately he preſſes me to oblige'him with a few lines, before the interview between Mr. Solmes and me take place (if it muſt take place) to confirm, his hope, that I have no view, in my diſpleaſure tohim,to give encouragement toSolmes.An apprehenſion, he ſays, that he muſt be excuſed for repeating; eſpecially as it is a favour granted to that man, which I have refuſed to him; ſince, as he infers, were it not with ſuch an expectation, why ſhould myfriendspreſs it?' 

Saturday, April 1.I HAVE written; and to this effect:'That I had never intended to write another line to a man, who could take upon himſelf to reflect upon my ſex and myſelf, for having thought fit to make uſe of my own judgment. 

'That I have ſubmitted to this interview with Mr. Solmes, purely as an act of duty, to ſhew my friends, that I will comply with their commands as far as I can; and that I hope, when Mr. Solmes himſelf ſhall ſee how determin'd I am, he will no longer proſecute a ſute, in which it is impoſſible he ſhould ſucceed with my conſent. 

'That my averſion to him is too ſincere to permit me to doubt myſelf on this occaſion. But, nevertheleſs, he, Mr. Lovelace, muſt not imagine, that my rejecting of Mr. Solmes is in favour to him. That I value my freedom and independency too much, if my friends will but leave me to my own judgment, to give them up to a man ſo uncontroulable, and who ſhews me beforehand, what I have to expect from him, were I in his power. 

'I expreſs my high diſapprobation of the methods he takes to come at what paſſes in a private family: That the pretence of corrupting other people's ſervants, by way of repriſal for the ſpies they have ſet upon him, is a very poor excuſe; a juſtification of one meanneſs by another. 

'That there is arightand awrongin every thing, let people put what gloſſes they pleaſe upon their actions. To condemn a deviation, and to follow it by as great a one, what is This doing but propagating a general corruption? A Stand muſt be made by ſomebody, turn round the evil as many as may, or virtue will be loſt:And ſhall it not be I,a worthy mind will ſay, that ſhall make this Stand? 

'I leave it to him to judge, whetherhisbe a worthy one, try'd by this rule: And whether, knowing the impetuoſity of his diſpoſition; and the improbability there is, that my family will ever be reconciled to him, I ought to encourage his hopes? 

'That theſe ſpots and blemiſhes give me not earneſtneſs enough for any ſake buthis own,to wiſh him in a juſter and nobler train of thinking and acting; for that I truly deſpiſe many of the ways he allows himſelf in: Our minds are therefore infinitely different: And as to his profeſſions of reformation, I muſt tell him, that profuſe acknowlegements, without amendment, are but to me as ſo many ſtop- mouth conceſſions, which he may find much eaſier to make, than either to defend himſelf, or amend his errors. 

'That I have been lately made acquainted [And ſo I have by Betty, and ſhe by my brother] with the fooliſh liberty he gives himſelf of declaiming againſt matrimony. I ſeverely reprehend him on this occaſion: And aſk him, with what view he can take ſo witleſs, ſo deſpicable a liberty, worthy only of the moſt abandon'd, and yet preſume to addreſsme? 

'I tell him, That if I am obliged to go to my uncle Antony's, it is not to be inferr'd, that I muſt thereforeneceſſarilybe Mr. Solmes's wife: Since I may not be ſo ſure, perhaps, that the ſame exceptions lie ſo ſstrongly againſt my quitting a houſe to which I ſhall be forcibly carry'd, as if I left myfather's houſe: And, at the worſt, I may be able to keep them in ſuſpenſe till my couſin Morden comes, who will have a right to put me in poſſeſſion of my grandfather's eſtate, if I inſiſt upon it.' 

This, I doubt, is ſomewhat of an artifice; being principally deſign'd to keep him out of miſchief. For I have but little hope, if carry'd thither, whether ſenſible or ſenſeleſs, if I am left to my brother's and ſiſter's mercy, but they will endeavour to force the ſolemn obligation upon me. Otherwiſe, were there but any proſpect of avoiding this, by delaying (or even by taking things to make me ill, if nothing elſe would do) till my couſin comes, I hope I ſhould not think of leaving even my uncle's houſe. For I ſhould not know how to ſquare it to my own principles, to diſpenſe with the duty I owe to my father, whereever it ſhall be his will to place me. 

But while you give me the charming hope, that, in order to avoid one man, I ſhall not be under the neceſſity of throwing myſelf upon the friends of the other; I think my caſe not abſolutely deſperate. 

I ſee not any of my family, nor hear from them in any way of kindneſs. This looks, as if they themſelves expected no great matters from that Tueſday's conference which makes my heart flutter every-time I think of it. 

My uncle Antony's intended preſence I do not much like: But That is preferable to my brother's or ſiſter's. My uncle is very impetuous in his anger. I can't think Mr. Lovelace can be much more ſo; at leaſt, he cannotlook it,as my uncle, with his harder features, can. Theſe ſea-proſper'd gentlemen, as my uncle has often made me think, net uſed to any but elemental controul, and even ready to buffet That; bluſter often as violently as the winds they are accuſtomed to be angry at. 

I believe both Mr. Solmes and I ſhall look like a couple of fools, if it be true, as my uncle Harlowewrites, and Betty often tells me, that he is as much afraid of ſeeing me, as I am of ſeeing him. 

Adieu, my happy, thrice happy, Miſs Howe, who have no hard terms affixed to your duty!—Who have nothing to do, but to fall in with a choice your mamma has made for you, to which you have not, nor can have, a juſt objection: Except the frowardneſs of ſex, as our free cenſurers would perhaps take the liberty to ſay, makes it one, that the choice was your mamma's, at firſt hand. Perverſe nature, we know, loves not to be preſcribed to; altho' youth is not ſo well qualify'd, either by ſedateneſs or experience, to chooſe for itſelf. 

Toknowyour own happineſs; and that it isnow,nor to leave it toafter-reflection to look back upon thepreferable paſtwith a heavy and ſelf-accuſing heart, that you did not chooſe it when you might have choſen it, is all that is neceſſary to complete your felicity!—And this power is wiſh'd you by 

Your CL. HARLOWE.LETTER XXVII. MiſsHOWE,To MiſsCLARISSA HARLOWE.
Sunday, April 2.I Ought yeſterday to have acknowleged the receipt of your parcel: Robin tells me, that the Joſeph Leman whom you mention as the traitor, ſaw him. He was in the poultry-yard, and ſpoke to Robin over the bank which divides that from the Green-Lane. What brings you hither, Mr. Robert?—But I can tell. Hie away, as faſt as you can. 

No doubt but their dependence upon this fellow's vigilance, and upon Betty's, leaves you more at liberty in your airings, than you would otherwiſe be: But you are the only perſon I ever heard of, who, in ſuch circumſtances, had not ſome faithful ſervant, totruſt little offices to. A poet, my dear, would not have gone to work for an Angelica, without giving her her Violetta, her Cleanthe, her Clelia, or ſome ſuch pretty-nam'd confidante.—An old nurſe at the least. 

I read to my mamma ſeveral paſſages of your letters. But your laſt paragraph, in your yeſterday's, charm'd her quite. You have won her heart by it, ſhe told me. And while her fit of gratitude for it laſted, I was thinking to open my propoſal, and to preſs it with all the earneſtneſs I could give it, when Hickman came in, making his legs, and ſtroking his cravat and ruffles in turn. 

I could moſt freely have ruffled him for it.—As it was—Sir—ſaw you not ſome one of the ſervants?—Could not one of them have come in before you? 

He begg'd pardon: Looked as if he knew not whether he had beſt keep his ground, or withdraw:—Till my mamma. Why, Nancy, we are not upon particulars.—Pray, Mr. Hickman, ſit down. 

By your le—ave, good madam, to me.—You know his drawl, when his muſcles give him the reſpectful heſitation— 

Ay, ay, pray ſit down, honeſt man, if you are weary!—But by mymamma,if you pleaſe. I deſire my hoop may have its full circumference. All they're good for, that I know, is to clean dirty ſhoes, and to keep ill-manner'd fellows at a diſtance. 

Strange girl! cry'd my mamma, diſpleaſed; but with a milder turn, Ay, ay, Mr. Hickman, ſit down byme.I have no ſuchforbidding follyin my dreſs.—I looked ſerious; and in my heart was glad this ſpeech of hers was not made to your uncle Antony. 

My mamma, with the true widow's freedom, would mighty prudently have led into our ſubject, and have had him ſee, I queſtion not, that very paragraph in your letter, which is ſo much in his favour. He was highlyobliged to dear Miſs Harlowe, ſhe would aſſure him; that ſhedidſay— 

But I aſked him, If he had any news by his laſt letters from London: A queſtion he always underſtands to be aſubject-changer; for otherwiſe I never put it. And ſo if he bebutſilent, I am not angry with him, that he anſwers it not. 

I chooſe not to mention my propoſal before him, till I know how it will be reliſh'd by my mamma. If it be not well received, perhaps I may employhimon the occaſion. Yet I don't like to owe him an obligation, if I could help it. For men who have his views in their heads, do ſo parade it, ſo ſstrut about, if a woman condeſcend to employ them in her affairs, that one has no patience with them. But if Ifindnot an opportunity this day, I willmakeone to-morrow. 

I ſhall not open either of your ſealed-up parcels, but inyourpreſence. There is no need. Your conduct is out of all queſtion with me: And by the extracts you have given me from his letters and your own, I know all that relates to the preſent ſituation of things between you. 

I was going to give you a little flippant hint or two. But ſince you wiſh to be thought ſuperior to all our ſex, in the command of yourſelf; and ſince indeed you deſerve to be ſo thought; I will ſpare you.—You are, however, at times, more than half inclin'd to ſpeak out. That you do not, is only owing to a little baſhful ſtruggle betweenyouandyourſelf,as I may ſay. When that is quite got over, I know you will favour me undiſguiſedly with the reſult. 

I cannot forgive your taking upon you (at ſo extravagant a rate too) to pay my mamma's ſervant. Indeed Iam,and Iwill be,angry with you for it. A year's wages at once well nigh (only as, unknown to my mamma, I make it better for the ſervants, accordingto their merits)!—How it made the man ſtare!—And it may be his ruin too, as far as I know. If he ſhould buy a ring, and marry a ſorry body in the neighbourhood with the money, one would be loth, a twelvemonth hence, that the poor old fellow ſhould think he had reaſon to wiſh the bounty never conferr'd! 

IMUSTgive you your way in theſe things,you ſay.—And I know there is no contradicting you: For you were ever putting too great a value upon little offices done foryou,and too little upon the great ones you do forothers.The ſatisfaction you have in doing ſo, I grant it, repays you. But why ſhould you, by the nobleneſs of your mind, throw reproaches upon the reſt of the world?—Particularly, upon your own family, and upon ours too? 

If, as I have heard you ſay, it is a good rule togiveWORDSthe hearing, but to form our judgments of men and things byDEEDS ONLY; what ſhall we think of one, who ſeeks to find palliatives inwords,for narrowneſs of heart in the very perſons herdeedsſo ſilently, yet ſo forcibly, reflect upon? Why bluſh you not, my dear friend, to be thus ſingular?—When you meet with another perſon, whoſe mind is like your own, then diſplay your excellencies as you pleaſe: But till then, for pity's ſake, let your heart and your ſpirit ſuffer a little contraction. 

I intended to write but a few lines; chiefly to let you know, your parcels are come ſafe. And accordingly I began in a large hand; and I am already come to the end of my ſecond ſheet. But I could write a quire without heſitation, upon a ſubject ſo copious, and ſo beloved, as is your praiſe.—Not forthisſingle inſtance of your generoſity; ſince I am really angry with you for it; but for the benevolence exemplified in the whole tenor of your life and actions; of which This is but a common inſtance. God direct you, in your own arduous trials, is allI have room to add; and make you as happy, as you think to be 

Your own ANNA HOWE.LETTER XXVIII. MiſsCLARISSA HARLOWE,To MiſsHOWE.
Sunday Night, April 2.I Have many new particulars to acquaint you with, that ſhew a great change in my friends behaviour to me. I did not think we had ſo much art among us, as I find we have. I will give them to you as they offer'd. 

All the family was at church in the morning. They brought good Dr. Lewin with them, in purſuance of a previous invitation. And the doctor ſent up to deſire my permiſſion to attend me in my own apartment. 

You may believe it was eaſily granted. 

So the doctor came up. 

We had a converſation of near an hour before dinner: But, to my ſurprize, he waved every thing that would have led to the ſubject I ſuppoſed he wanted to talk about. At laſt, I aſked him, If it were not thought ſtrange I ſhould be ſo long abſent from church? He made me ſome handſome compliments upon it: But ſaid, For his part, he had ever made it a rule, to avoid interfering in the private concerns of families, unleſs deſired to do ſo. 

I was prodigiouſly diſappointed: But ſuppoſing that he was thought too juſt a man to be made a judge of in this cauſe; I led no more to it: Nor, when he was called to dinner, did he take the leaſt notice of leaving me behind him there. 

But this was the firſt time, ſince my confinement, that I thought it a hardſhip not to dine below. And when I parted with him on the ſtairs, a tear would burſtits way; and he hurried down; his own good-natured eyes gliſtening; for he ſaw it.—Nor truſted he his voice, leſt the accent, I ſuppoſe, ſhould have diſcover'd his concern; departing in ſilence; tho' with his uſual graceful obligingneſs. 

I hear, that he praiſed me, and my part in the converſation we had held together.—To ſhew them, I ſuppoſe, that it was not upon the intereſting ſubjects which I make no doubt he was deſired not to enter upon. 

He left me ſo diſſatisfy'd, yet ſo perplexed with this new way of treatment, that I never found myſelf ſo puzzled, and ſo much out of my train. 

But I was to be more ſo. This was to be a day of puzzle to me.Pregnantpuzzle, if I may ſo ſay:—For there muſt great meaning lie behind it. 

In the afternoon, all but my brother and ſiſter went to church with the good doctor; who left his compliments for me. I took a walk in the garden: My brother and ſiſter walked in it too, and kept me in their eye a good while, on purpoſe, as I thought, that I might ſee how gay and good-humour'd they were together. At laſt they came down the walk that I was coming up, hand-in-hand, lover-like. 

Your ſervant, Miſs—Your ſervant, Sir—paſſed between my brother and me. 

Is it not cold-iſh, ſiſter Clary? in a kinder voice than uſual, ſaid my ſiſter, and ſtopp'd.—I ſtopp'd, and courteſy'd low to her half-courteſy.—I think not, ſiſter, ſaid I. 

She went on. I courteſy'd without return; and proceeded; turning to my poultry-yard. 

By a ſhorter turn, arm-in-arm, they were there before me. 

I think, Clary, ſaid my brother, you muſt preſent me with ſome of this breed, for Scotland. 

If you pleaſe, brother. 

I'll chooſe for you, ſaid my ſiſter. 

And while I fed them, they picked out half a dozen: Yet intending nothing by it, I believe, but to ſhew a deal of love and good-humour to each other, before me. 

My uncles next (after church was done, to ſpeak in the common phraſe) were to do me the honour oftheirnotice. They bid Betty tell me, they would drink tea with me in my own apartment. Now, thought I, ſhall I have the ſubject of next Tueſday inforced upon me. 

But they contradicted the tea-orders, and only my uncle Harlowe came up to me. 

Half-diſtant, half-affectionate, was the air he put on to hisdaughter-niece,as he uſed to call me; and I threw myſelf at his feet, and beſought his favour. 

None of theſe diſcompoſures, child! None of theſe apprehenſions! You'll now have every-body's favour! All is coming about, my dear!—I was impatient to ſee you!—I could no longer deny myſelf this ſatisfaction. And raiſed me, and kiſſed me, and called me, Charming creature! 

But he waved entering into any intereſting ſubject. All will be well now! All will be right!—No more complainings! Every-body loves you!—I only came to make my earlieſt court to you, were his condeſcending words, and to ſit and talk of twenty and twenty fond things, as I uſed to do.—And let every paſt diſagreeable thing be forgotten; as if nothing had happen'd. 

He underſtood me as beginning to hint at the diſgrace of my confinement.—No diſgrace, my dear, can fall to your lot: Your reputation is too well eſtabliſhed.—I long'd to ſee you, repeated he.—I have ſeen no-body half ſo amiable, ſince I ſaw you laſt. 

And again he kiſſed my cheek, my glowing cheek, for I was impatient, I was vexed, to be thus, as I thought, play'd upon: And how could I be grateful for a viſit, that, it now was evident, was only a toohumbleartifice, to draw me in againſt the next Tueſday, or to leave me inexcuſable to them all! 

O my cunning brother!—This is his contrivance! And then my anger made me recollect the triumph in his and my ſiſter's loves to each other, acted before me; and the mingled indignation flaſhing from their eyes, as, arm in arm, they ſpoke to me, and the forced condeſcenſion playing upon their lips, when they called me Clary, and Siſter. 

Do you think I could, with theſe reflections, look upon my uncle Harlowe's viſit as the favour he ſeem'd deſirous I ſhould think it to be?—Indeed I could not; and ſeeing him ſo ſtudiouſly avoid all recrimination, as I may call it, I gave into the affectation; and followed him in his talk of indifferent things:—While he ſeemed to admire This thing and That, as if he had never ſeen them before; and now and then, condeſcendingly kiſſed the hand that wrought ſome of the things he fixed his eyes upon; not ſo much to admire them, as to find ſubjects to divert what was moſt in his head, and in my own heart. 

At his going away—How can I leave you here by yourſelf, my dear?—You, whoſe company uſed to enliven us all.—You are not expected down indeed! But I proteſt, I had a good mind to ſurpriſe your papa and mamma!—If I thought nothing would ariſe, that would be diſagreeable—My dear, my love! [O the dear artful gentleman! how could my uncle Harlowe ſo diſſemble?] What ſay you?—Will you give me your hand?—Will you ſee your father?—Can you ſtand his firſt diſpleaſure, on ſeeing the dear creature who has given him and all of us ſo much diſturbance?—Can you promiſe future— 

He ſaw me riſing in my temper—Nay, my dear, if you cannot be all reſignation, I would not have you think of it! 

My heart, ſtruggling between duty and warmth of temper, was full. You know, my dear, I never couldbear to be dealt meanly with!—How,—howcanyou, Sir!—You, my papa-uncle!—Howcanyou, Sir!—The poor girl!—For I could not ſpeak with connexion. 

Nay, my dear, if you cannot be all duty, all reſignation—better ſtay where you are.—But after the inſtance you have given— 

Inſtance, I have given!—What inſtance, Sir? 

Well, well, child, better ſtay where you are, if your paſt confinement hangs ſo heavy upon you—But now there will be a ſudden end to it.—Adieu, my dear!—Three words only—Let your compliance be ſincere!—And love me, as you uſed to love me—Your grandfather did not do ſo much for you, as I will do for you. 

Without ſuffering me to reply, he hurry'd away, I thought, as if he had an eſcape, and was glad his part was over. 

Don't you ſee, my dear, how they are all determin'd?—Have I not reaſon to dread next Tueſday? 

Up preſently after came my ſiſter:—To obſerve, I ſuppoſe, the way I was in—She found me in tears. 

Have you not a Thomas à Kempis, ſiſter? with a ſtiff air. 

I have, Madam. 

Madam!How long are we to be at this diſtance, Clary? 

Nolonger, if you allow me to call you, ſiſter, my dear Bella! And I took her hand. 

No fawning neither, girl! 

I withdrew my hand as haſtily, as I ſhould do, if, reaching at a parcel from under the wood, I had been bit by a ſcorpion. 

I beg pardon.—Too, too ready to make advances, I am always ſubjecting myſelf to contempts! 

People who know not how to keep a middle behaviour, ſaid ſhe, muſt ever-more do ſo. 

I will fetch you the Kempis—I did—Here it is.—You will find excellent things, Bella, in that little book. 

I wiſh, retorted ſhe, you had profited by them. 

I wiſhyoumay, ſaid I. Example from a ſiſter older than one's ſelf is a fine thing. 

Older! Saucy little fool!—And away ſhe flung. 

What a captious old woman will my ſiſter make, if ſhe lives to be one!—Demanding the reverence; yet not aiming at the merit; and aſham'd of the years, that only can intitle her to the reverence. 

It is plain from what I haverelated,that they think they have got me at ſome advantage, by obtaining my conſent to this interview: But if it werenot,Betty's impertinence juſt now would make it more evident. She has been complimenting me upon it; and upon the viſit of my uncle Harlowe. She ſays, the difficulty now is more than half over with me. She is ſure I would not ſee Mr. Solmes, but to have him. Now ſhall ſhe be ſoon better imploy'd than of late ſhe has been. All hands will be at work. She loves dearly to have weddings go forward!—Who knows whoſe turn will be next? 

I found in the afternoon a reply to my anſwer to Mr. Lovelace's letter: It is full of promiſes, full of gratitude, ofeternalgratitude, is his word, among others ſtill more hyperbolic. Yet Mr. Lovelace, theleaſtof any man whoſe letters I have ſeen, runs into thoſe elevated abſurdities. I ſhould be apt to deſpiſe him for it, if he did. Such language looks always to me, as if the flatterer thought tofinda woman a fool, or hop'd tomakeher one. 

'He regrets my indifference to him; which puts all the hope he has in my ſavour, upon my friends ſhocking uſage of me. 

'As to my charge upon him of unpoliteneſs and uncontroulableneſs—What (he aſks) can he ſay? ſince being unable abſolutely to vindicate himſelf,he has too much ingenuity to attempt to do so: Yet is ſtruck dumb by my harſh conſtruction, that his acknowleging temper is owing more to his careleſneſs to defend himſelf, than to his inclination to amend. He had neverbeforemet with the objections againſt his morals which I had raiſed,juſtlyraiſed. And he was reſolved to obviate them. What is it, he aſks, that he had promiſed, but reformation by my example? And what occaſion for the promiſe, if he had not faults, and thoſe very great ones, to reform of? He hopes, acknowlegement of an error is no bad ſign; altho' my ſevere virtue has interpreted it into one. 

'He believes I may be right (ſeverelyright, he calls it) in my judgment againſt making repriſals in the caſe of the intelligence he receives from my family: He cannot charge himſelf to be of a temper that leads him to be inquiſitive into any-body's private affairs; but hopes, that the circumſtances of the caſe, and the ſtrange conduct of my friends, will excuſe him; eſpecially, when ſo much depends upon his knowing the movements of a family ſo violently bent, by meaſures right or wrong, to carry their point againſt me, in malice to him. People he ſays, who act like Angels, ought to have Angels to deal with. For his part, he has not yet learn'd the difficult leſſon of returninggood for evil:And ſhall think himſelf the leſs encourag'd to learn it, by the treatment I have met with, from the very ſpirits, which, were he to lay himſelf under their feet, would trample upon him, as they do upon me. 

'He excuſes himſelf for the liberties he owns he has heretofore taken in ridiculing the marriage-ſtate. It is a ſubject, he ſays, that he has not of late treated ſo lightly. He owns it to be ſo trite, ſo beaten, a topic with all libertines and witlings; ſo frothy, ſo empty, ſo nothing-meaning, ſo worn-out atheme,that he is heartily aſhamed of himſelf, ever to havemade ithis.He condemns it as a ſtupid reflection upon the laws and good order of ſociety, and upon a man's own anceſtors: And in himſelf, who has ſome reaſon to value himſelf upon his deſcent and alliances, more cenſurable, than in thoſe who have not the ſame advantage to boaſt of. He promiſes to be more circumſpect than ever, both in his words and actions, that he may be more and more worthy of my approbation; and that he may give an aſſurance before-hand, that a foundation is laid in his mind, for my example to work upon, with equal reputation and effect to us both;—if he may be ſo happy as to call me his. 

'He gives me up, as abſolutely loſt, if I go to my uncle Antony's: The cloſe confinement; The Moated-houſe; The Chapel; the implacableneſs of my brother and ſiſter, and their power over the reſt of my family, he ſets forth in ſtrong lights, and plainly hints, that he muſt have a ſtruggle to prevent my being carry'd thither.' 

Your kind, your generous intereſting of yourſelf in your mamma's favour for me, I hope, will prevent thoſe harſher extremities which I might otherwiſe be driven to. And to you I will fly, if permitted, and keep all my promiſes, of not correſponding with any-body, not ſeeing any-body, but by your mamma's direction and yours.—I will cloſe, and depoſite at This place. It is not neceſſary to ſay, How much I am 

Your ever-affectionate and obliged CL. HARLOWE.LETTER XXIX. MiſsCLARISSA HARLOWE,To MiſsHOWE.
Monday, April 3.I Am glad my papers are ſafe in your hands. I will make it my endeavour to deſerve your good opinion, that I may not at once diſgrace your judgment, and my own heart. 

I have another letter from Mr. Lovelace. He is extremely apprehenſive of the meeting I am to have with Mr. Solmes to-morrow. He ſays,'That the airs that wretch gives himſelf on the occaſion, add to his concern; and it is with infinite difficulty that he prevails upon himſelf, not to make him a viſit, to let him know what he may expect, if compulſion be uſed towards me in his favour. He aſſures me, That Solmes has actually talked with tradeſmen of new equipages, and names the people in town, with whom he has treated: That he has even (Was there ever ſuch a horrid wretch!) allotted This and That apartment in his houſe, for a nurſery, and other offices.' 

How ſhall I bear to hear ſuch a creature talk of love to me? I ſhall be out of all patience with him!—Beſides, I thought that he did not dare to make or talk of theſe impudent preparations—So inconſiſtent as ſuch are with my brother's views—But I fly the ſhocking ſubject. 

Upon this confidence of Solmes, you will leſs wonder at That of Lovelace,'in preſſing me, in the name of all his family, to eſcape from ſo determined a violence, as is intended to be offer'd to me at my uncle's: That the forward contriver ſhould propoſe his uncle's chariot-and-ſix to be at the ſtile that leads up to the lonely coppice, adjoining to our paddock. You will ſee how audaciouſly he mentionsſettlements ready drawn; horſemen ready to mount; and one of his couſins Montague to be in the chariot, or at the George in the neighbouring village, waiting to accompany me to Lord M's, or to either of his aunts, or to town, as I pleaſe; and upon ſuch orders, or conditions, and under ſuch reſtrictions, as to himſelf, as I ſhall preſcribe.' 

You will ſee how he threatens'To watch and way-lay them, and reſcue me, as he calls it, by an armed force of friends and ſervants, if they attempt to carry me againſt my will to my uncle's; and this, whether I give my conſent to the enterpriſe, or not:—Since he ſhall have no hopes if I am once there.' 

O my dear friend! Who can think of theſe things, and not be extremely miſerable in her apprehenſions! 

This miſchievous ſex! What had I to do with any of them; or they with me!—I had deſerv'd This, were it by my own ſeeking, by my own giddineſs, that I had brought myſelf into this ſituation—I wiſh, with all my heart—But how fooliſhly we are apt to wiſh, when we find ourſelves unhappy, and know not how to help ourſelves. 

On your mamma's goodneſs, however, is my reliance. If I can but avoid being precipitated on either hand, till my couſin Morden arrives, a reconciliation muſt follow; and all will be happy! 

I have depoſited a letter for Mr. Lovelace; in which'I charge him to avoid any raſh ſtep, any viſit to Mr. Solmes, which may be followed by acts of violence, as he would not diſoblige me for ever. 

I re-aſſure him,'That I will ſooner die than be 'that man's wife. 

'Whatever be my uſage, whatever the reſult of this interview, I inſiſt upon his not preſuming to offer violence to any of my friends: And expreſs myſelf highly diſpleaſed, that he ſhould preſume upon ſuch an intereſt in my favour, as to think himſelf intitled to diſpute my father's authority in myremoval to my uncle's; altho' I tell him, that I will omit neither prayers nor contrivance, even to the making of myſelf ill, to avoid going.' 

To-morrow is Tueſday!—How ſoon comes upon us the day we dread!—O that a deep ſleep of twenty-four hours would ſeize my faculties—But then the next day would be Tueſday, as to all the effects and purpoſes, for which I ſo much dread it. If this reach you before the event of this ſo much apprehended interview can be known, pray for 

Your CL. HARLOWE.LETTER XXX. MiſsCLARISSA HARLOWE,To MiſsHOWE.
Tueſday Morning, Six o'Clock.THE day is come!—I wiſh it were happily over. I have had a wretched night. Hardly a wink have I ſlept, ruminating upon the approaching interview. The very diſtance of time they conſented to, has added ſolemnity to the meeting, which otherwiſe it would not have had. 

A thoughtful mind is not a bleſſing to be coveted, unleſs it had ſuch a happy vivacity with it, as yours: A vivacity, which enables a perſon to enjoy thepreſent,without being over-anxious about thefuture. 

Tueſday, Eleven o'Clock.I HAVE had a viſit from my aunt Hervey. Betty, in her alarming way, told me, I ſhould have a Lady to breakfaſt with me, whom I little expected; giving me to believe it was my mamma. This flutter'd me ſo much, on hearing a Lady coming up-ſtairs, ſuppoſing it was ſhe (not knowing how to account for her motives in ſuch a viſit, after I had been ſo long baniſh'd from her preſence) that my aunt, at her entrance,took notice of my diſorder, and after the firſt ſalutation, 

Why, Miſs ſaid ſhe, you ſeem ſurpriz'd!—Upon my word, you thoughtful young Ladies have ſtrange apprehenſions about nothing at all. What, taking my hand, can be the matter with you?—Why, my dear, tremble, tremble, tremble at this rate? You'll be fit to be ſeen by no-body. Come, my love, kiſſing my cheek, pluck up a courage! By this needleſs flutter on the approaching interview, when it is over, you will judge of your other antipathies, and laugh at yourſelf for giving way to ſo apprehenſive an imagination. 

I ſaid, that whatever we ſtrongly imagin'd, was, in its effects at the time,morethan imaginary, altho' to others it might not appear ſo: That I had not reſted one hour all night: That the impertinent ſet over me had flutter'd me, with giving me room to think, that it was my mamma who was coming up to me: And that, at this rate, I ſhould be very little qualify'd to ſee any-body I diſliked to ſee. 

There was no accounting for theſe things, ſhe ſaid. Mr. Solmes laſt night ſuppos'd he ſhould be under as much agitation as I. 

Who is it, then, Madam, that ſo reluctant an interview on both ſides, is to pleaſe? 

Both of you, my dear, I hope, after the firſt flurries are over. The moſt apprehenſive beginnings, I have often known, make the happieſt concluſions. 

There can be but one happy concluſion to the intended viſit, and that is, That both ſides may be ſatisfy'd it will be the laſt. 

She then repreſented, how unhappy it would be for me, if I did not ſuffer myſelf to be prevailed upon: She preſſed me to receive him as became my education: And declar'd, that his apprehenſions at ſeeing me, were owing to his love and his awe; intim•ting, that true love was beſt known by fear, andreverence; and that no bluſtering, braving lover could deſerve encouragement. 

To this I anſwered, That conſtitution was a great deal to be conſidered: That a man of ſpirit would act like one, and could do nothing meanly: That a creeping mind would creep in every-thing, where it had a view to obtain a benefit by it; and inſult, where it had power, and nothing to expect:—That this was not a point now to be determin'd with me: That I had ſaid as much as I could poſſibly ſay on this ſubject: That this interview was impoſed upon me: By thoſe, indeed, who had a right to impoſe it; but that it was ſorely againſt my will comply'd with, and for this reaſon, That there wasaverſion,notwilfulneſs,in the caſe; and ſo nothing could come of it, but a pretence, as I much apprehended, to uſe me ſtill more ſeverely than I had been uſed. 

She was then pleaſed to charge me with prepoſſeſſion, and prejudice: Expatiated upon the duty of a child: Imputed to me abundance of fine qualities; but told me, that, in this caſe,thatof perſuadableneſs was wanting to crown All. She inſiſted upon themeritof obedience, altho' my will werenotin it. From a little hint I gave of my ſtill greater diſlike to ſee Mr. Solmes, on account of the freedom I had treated him with, ſhe talked to me of his forgiving diſpoſition; of his infinite reſpect for me; and I-can-not-tell-what of this ſort.— 

I never found myſelf ſo fretful in my life. I told my aunt ſo; and begg'd her pardon for it. But ſhe ſaid, it was well diſguiſed then; for ſhe ſaw nothing but little tremors uſual with young Ladies, when they were to ſee their admirers for thefirſttime, as this might be called: For that it was the firſt time I had conſented to ſee him in that light.—But that thenext— 

How, Madam, interrupted I!—Is it then imagined I give this meeting upon that foot?— 

To be ſure it is, child.— 

To be ſure it is,Madam!—Then do I yet deſire to decline it!—I will not, I cannot, ſee him, if he expects me to ſee him upon thoſe terms. 

Niceneſs, punctilio!—Mere punctilio, niece!—Can you think that your appointment, Day, Place, Hour, and knowing what the intent of it was, is to be interpreted away as a mere ceremony, and to mean nothing?—Let me tell you, my dear, your father, mother, uncles, every-body, reſpect this appointment as the firſt act of your compliance with their wills; and therefore recede not, I deſire you; but make a merit of what cannot be help'd!— 

O the hideous wretch!—Pardon me, Madam,—Ito be ſuppos'd to meet ſuch a man asthat,with ſuch a view! andheto be arm'd with ſuch an expectation!—But it cannot be thatheexpects it, whatever others may do.—It is plain he cannot, by the fear he tells you all, he ſhall have to ſee me: If hishopewere ſo audacious, he could notfearſo much. 

Indeed, hehasthis hope; and juſtly founded too. But his fear ariſes from his reverence, as I told you before. 

His reverence!—his unworthineſs!—'Tis ſo apparent, that he himſelf ſees it, as well as every-body elſe. Hence the purchaſe he aims at!—Hence is it, that ſettlements are to make up for acknowleg'd want of merit!— 

Hisunworthineſs,ſay you!—Not ſo faſt, my dear. Does not this look like ſetting a high value upon yourſelf?—We all have exalted notions of your merit, niece; but nevertheleſs, it would not be wrong, if you were to arrogate leſs toyourſelf; tho' more were to be your due, than your friends attribute to you. 

I am ſorry, Madam, it ſhould be thought arrogance in me, to ſuppoſe I am not worthy of a better man than Mr. Solmes, both as to perſon and mind:And as to fortune, I thank God I deſpiſe all that can be inſiſted upon in his favour, from ſo poor a plea. 

She told me, It ſignify'd nothing to talk: I knew the expectation of every-one— 

Indeed I did not.—It was impoſſible I could think of ſuch a ſtrange expectation, upon a compliance made only to ſhew, I would comply in all that was in my power to comply with. 

I might eaſily, me ſaid, have ſuppoſed, that every-one thought I was beginning to oblige them all, by the kind behaviour of my brother and ſiſter to me in the garden, laſt Sunday; by my ſiſter's viſit to me afterwards in my chamber; altho' both more ſtiffly received by me, than were either wiſhed or expected; by my uncle Harlowe's affectionate viſit to me the ſame afternoon; not indeed ſo very gratefully received, as I uſed to receive his favours:—But this he kindly imputed to the diſpleaſure I had conceived at my confinement, and to my coming-off by degrees, that I might keep myſelf in countenance for my paſt oppoſition! 

See, my dear, the low cunning of that Sunday-management, which then ſo much ſurpriſed me! And ſee the reaſon why Dr. Lewin was admitted to viſit me, yet forbore to enter upon a ſubject that I thought he came to talk to me about!—For, it ſeems, there was no occaſion to diſpute with me on a point I was to beſuppoſedto have conceded to.—See, alſo, how unfairly my brother and ſiſter muſt have repreſented their pretended kindneſs, when (tho' they had an end to anſwer byappearingkind) their antipathy to me ſeems to have been ſo ſtrong, that they could not help inſulting me by their arm-in-arm lover-like behaviour to each other; as my ſiſter afterwards likewiſe did, when ſhe came to borrow my Kempis.— 

I lifted up my hands and eyes!—I cannot, ſaid I, give this treatment a name!—Theendſo unlikely to be anſwer'd bymeansſo low!—I knowwhoſethe wholeis!—He that could get my uncle Harlowe to contribute his part, and procure the acquieſcence of the reſt of my friends to it, muſt have the power to do any thing with them againſt me!— 

Again my aunt told me, that talking and invective, now I had given the expectation, would ſignify nothing. She hoped I would not ſhew them all, that they had been too forward in their conſtructions of my deſire to oblige them. She could aſſure me, that it would be worſe for me, ifnowI receded, than if I had never advanced— 

Advanced,Madam! How can you ſayadvanced?Why, this is a trick upon me!—A poor, low trick! Pardon me, Madam, I don't ſay you have a hand in it.—But, my deareſt aunt, tell me, Will not my mamma be preſent at this dreaded interview?—Will ſhe not ſo far favour me?—Were it but to qualify— 

Qualify,my dear, interrupted ſhe—Your mamma, and your uncle Harlowe, would not be preſent on this occaſion for the world— 

O then, Madam, how can they look upon my conſent to this interview as anadvance? 

My aunt was diſpleaſed at this home puſh. Miſs Clary, ſaid ſhe, there is no dealing with you. It would be happy for you, and for every-body elſe, were your obedience as ready as your wit. I will leave you— 

Not in anger, I hope, Madam! interrupted I—All I meant was, to obſerve, that let the meeting iſſue as itmuſtiſſue, it cannot be a diſappointment toany-body. 

O Miſs! you ſeem to be a very determin'd young creature.—Mr. Solmes will be here at your time▪And remember once more, that upon the coming afternoon depends the peace of your whole family▪and your own happineſs.— 

And ſo ſaying, down ſhe hurried. 

Here I ſtop. In what way I ſhall reſume, or when, is not left to me to conjecture; much leſs to determine. I am exceſſively uneaſy!—No good news from your mamma, I doubt!—I will depoſite thus far, for fear of the worſt. 

Adieu, my beſt, myonlyfriend! 

LETTER XXXI. MiſsCLARISSA HARLOWE,To MiſsHOWE.
Tueſday Evening; and continued thro' the night.WELL, my dear, I am alive, and here! But how long I ſhall be either here, or alive, I cannot ſay!—I have a vaſt deal to write; and perhaps ſhall have little time for it. Nevertheleſs, I muſt tell you how the ſaucy Betty again fluttered me, when ſhe came up with this Solmes's meſſage; altho', as you will remember from my laſt, I was in a way before, that wanted no additional ſurprizes. 

Miſs! Miſs! Miſs! cry'd ſhe, as faſt as ſhe could ſpeak, with her arms ſpread abroad, and all her fingers diſtended, and held up, will you be pleaſed to walk down into your own parlour?—There is every-body, I'll aſſure you, in fullcongregation!—And there is Mr. Solmes, as fine as a Lord, with a charming white peruke, fine laced ſhirt and ruffles, coat trimmed with ſilver, and a waiſtcoat ſtanding an end with lace!—Quite handſome, believe me!—You never ſaw ſuch an alteration!—Ah! Miſs, ſhaking her head, 'tis pity you have ſaid ſo much againſt him!—But you know how to come off, for all that!—I hope it will not be too late!— 

Impertinence! ſaid I,—Wert thou bid to come up in this fluttering way?—And I took up my fan, and fann'd myſelf. 

Bleſs me! ſaid ſhe, how ſoon theſe fine young Ladies will be put intofluſterations!—I meant not either to offend or frighten you, I am ſure.— 

Every-body there, do you ſay?—Who do you call every-body?— 

Why, Miſs, holding out her left palm opened, and with a flouriſh, and a ſaucy leer, patting it with the fore-finger of the other at every mentioned perſon, There is your papa!—There is your mamma!—There is your uncle Harlowe!—There is your uncle Antony!—Your aunt Hervey!—Myyoung Lady!—And my young maſter!—And Mr. Solmes, with the air of a great courtier, ſtanding up, becauſe he named you:—Mrs. Betty, ſaid he, [Then the ape of a wench bowed, and ſcraped, as awkwardly as I ſuppoſe the perſon ſhe endeavoured to imitate] Pray give my humble ſervice to Miſs, and tell her, I wait her commands. 

Was not this a wicked wench?—I trembled ſo, I could hardly ſtand. I was ſpiteful enough to ſay, that her young miſtreſs, I ſuppoſed, bid her put on theſe airs, to frighten me out of a capacity of behaving ſo calmly, as ſhould procure me my uncle's compaſſion. 

What a way do you put yourſelf in, Miſs, ſaid the inſolent!—Come, dear Madam, taking up my fan, which I had laid down, and approaching me with it, fanning, ſhall I— 

None of thy impertinence!—But ſay you,allmy friends are below with him? And am I toappearbefore themall? 

I can't tell if they'll ſtay when you come. I think they ſeemed to be moving when Mr. Solmes gave me his orders.—But what anſwer ſhall I carry to the 'Squire? 

Say, I can't go!—But yet, when 'tis over, 'tis over! Say, I'll wait upon—I'll attend—I'll come preſently—Say any thing; I care not what—But give me my fan, and fetch me a glaſs of water. 

She went, and I fanned myſelf all the time; for I was in a flame; and hemm'd, and ſtruggled with myſelf,all I could; and, when ſhe returned, drank my water; and finding no hope preſently of a quieter heart, I ſent her down, and followed her with precipitation; trembling ſo, that, had I not hurried, I queſtion if I could have gone down at all. O, my dear, what a poor, paſſive machine is the body, when the mind is diſorder'd! 

There are two doors tomyparlour, as I uſed to call it. As I entered at one, my friends hurried out at the other. I ſaw juſt the gown of my ſiſter, the laſt who ſlid away. My uncle Antony went out with them; but he ſtaid not long, as you ſhall hear: And they all remained in the next parlour, a wain-ſcot-partition only parting the two. I remember them both in one: But they were ſeparated in favour of us girls, for each to receive her viſitors in, at her pleaſure. 

Mr. Solmes approached me as ſoon as I entered, cringing to the ground; a viſible confuſion in every feature of his face. After half a dozen choak'd-up Madams,—He was very ſorry—he was very much concerned—It was his misfortune—And there he ſtopp'd, being unable preſently to complete a ſentence. 

This gave me a little more preſence of mind. Cowardice in a foe begets courage in one's-ſelf:—I ſee that plainly now;—Yet perhaps, at bottom, the new-made bravo is a greater coward than the other. 

I turned from him, and ſeated myſelf in one of the fire-ſide chairs, fanning myſelf. I have ſince recollected, that I muſt have looked very ſaucily. Could I have had anythoughtsof the man, I ſhould have deſpiſed myſelf for it. But what can be ſaid in the caſe of an averſion ſo perfectly ſincere? 

He hemmed five or ſix times, as I had done above; and theſe produced a ſentence—That I could not but ſee his confuſion. This ſentence produced two or three more. I believe my aunt was his tutoreſs: For it was his awe, his reverence for ſo ſuperlative aLady—[I aſſure you]—And he hoped—he hoped—Three times he hoped, before he told me what—that I was too generous [Generoſity, he ſaid, was my character], to deſpiſe him for ſuch—for ſuch—truetokens of his love.— 

I do indeed ſee you under ſome confuſion, Sir; and this gives me hope, that altho' I have been compelled, as I may call it, to this interview, it may be attended with happier effects than I had apprehended from it. 

He had hemmed himſelf into more courage. 

You could not, Madam, imagine any creature ſo blind to your merits, and ſo little attracted by them, as eaſily to forego the intereſt and approbation he was honoured with by your worthy family, while he had any hope given him, that one day he might, by his perſeverance and zeal, expect your favour. 

I am but too much aware, Sir, that it is upon the intereſt and approbation you mention, that you build ſuch hope. It is impoſſible, otherwiſe, that a man, who has any regard for hisownhappineſs, would perſevere againſt ſuch declarations as I have made, and think myſelf obliged to make, in juſtice to you, as well as to myſelf. 

He had ſeen many inſtances, he told me, and had heard of more, where Ladies had ſeemed as averſe, and yet had been induced, ſome by motives of compaſſion; others by perſuaſion of friends, to change their minds; and had been very happy afterwards: And he hoped this might be the caſe here. 

I have no notion, Sir, of compliment, in an article of ſuch importance as this: Yet am I ſorry to be obliged to ſpeak my mind ſo plainly, as I am going to do.—Know then, that I have invincible objections, Sir, to your addreſs. I have declared them with an earneſtneſs that I believe is without example: And why?—Becauſe I believe it is without example, that any young creature, circumſtanced as I am, was ever treated as I have been treated on your account. 

It is hoped, Madam, that your conſent may, in time, be obtained:Thatis the hope; and I ſhall be a miſerable man if it cannot. 

Better, Sir, give me leave to ſay, you were miſerable by yourſelf, than that you ſhould make two ſo. 

You may have heard, Madam, things to my diſadvantage.—No man is without enemies.—Be pleaſed to let me knowwhatyou have heard, and I will either own my faults, and amend; or I will convince you, that I am baſelybeſpattered:And once I underſtand you overheard ſomething that I ſhould ſay, that gave you offence:—Unguardedly, perhaps; but nothing but what ſhewed my value, and that I would perſiſt ſo long as I could have hope. 

I have indeed heard many things to your diſadvantage:—And I was far from being pleaſed with what I overheard fall from your lips: But as you were not any thing to me, and never could be, it was not for me to be concerned about the one or the other. 

I am ſorry, Madam, to hear this: I am ſure you ſhould not tell me of any fault, that I would be unwilling to correct in myſelf. 

Then, Sir, correct this fault:—Do not wiſh to have a poor young creature compelled in the moſt material article of her life, for the ſake of motives ſhe deſpiſes; and in behalf of a perſon ſhe cannot value: One that has, in her own right, ſufficient to ſet her above all offers, and a ſpirit that craves no more than what ithas,to make itſelf eaſy and happy. 

I don't ſee, Madam, how you would be happy, if I were to diſcontinue my addreſs: For— 

That is nothing to you, Sir, interrupted I: Do you but withdraw your pretenſions: And if it be thought fit to ſtart up another man for my puniſhment, the blame will not lie at your door. You will be intitled to my thanks; and moſt heartily will I thank you. 

He pauſed, and ſeemed a little at a loſs: And Iwas going to give him ſtill ſtronger and more perſonal inſtances of my plain-dealing; when in came my uncle Antony! 

So, niece, ſo!—ſitting in ſtate like a Queen, giveing audience!—haughtyaudience!—Mr. Solmes, why ſtand you thus humbly?—Why this diſtance, man? I hope to ſee you upon a more intimate footing before we part. 

I aroſe, as ſoon as he entered—and approached him with a bent knee: Let me, Sir, reverence my uncle, whom I have not for ſo long a time ſeen!—Let me, Sir, beſpeak your favour and compaſſion! 

You'll have the favour of every-body, niece, when you know how to deſerve it. 

If ever I deſerved it, I deſerve it now.—I have been hardly uſed—I have made propoſals that ought to have been accepted; and ſuch as would not have beenaſkedof me. What have I done, that I muſt be baniſhed and confined thus diſgracefully? That I muſt be allowed to have no free-will, in an article that concerns my preſent and future happineſs?— 

Miſs Clary, replied my uncle, you have had your will in every-thing till now; and this makes your parents will ſit ſo heavy upon you. 

My will, Sir! Be pleaſed to allow me to aſk, What was my will till now, but my father's will, and yours, and my uncle Harlowe's will?—Has it not been my pride to obey and oblige?—I never aſked a favour, that I did not firſt ſit down and conſider, if it were fit to be granted. And now, to ſhew my obedience, have I not offered to live ſingle? Have I not offered to diveſt myſelf of my grandfather's bounty, and to caſt myſelf upon my papa's; to be withdrawn, whenever I diſoblige him? Why, dear good Sir, am I to be made unhappy in a point ſo concerning to my happineſs? 

Your grandfather's eſtate is not wiſhed from you. You are not deſired to live a ſingle life. You knowourmotives, and we gueſs atyours.And let me tell you, well as we love you, we would much ſooner chooſe to follow you to the grave, than thatyoursſhould take place. 

I will engage never to marry any man, without my father's conſent, and your's, Sir, and everybody's. Did I ever give you cauſe to doubt my word?—And here I will take the ſolemneſt oath that can be offered me— 

That is the matrimonial one, interrupted he, with a big voice—and to this gentleman.—It ſhall, it ſhall, couſin Clary!—And the more you oppoſe it, the worſe it ſhall be for you. 

This, and before the man, who ſeem'd to aſſume courage upon it, highly provoked me. 

Then, Sir, you ſhall ſooner follow me to the graveindeed.—I will undergo the crueleſt death: I will even conſent to enter into the awful vault of my anceſtors, and to have that bricked up upon me, than conſent to be miſerable for life.—And, Mr. Solmes, (turning to him) take notice of what I ſay;This,oranydeath, I will ſooner undergo (That will ſoon be over), than be yours, and foreverunhappy! 

My uncle was in a terrible rage upon this: He took Mr. Solmes by the hand, ſhocked as the man ſeemed to be, and drew him to the window—Don't be ſurpriſed, Mr. Solmes, don't be concerned atthis.We know, and rapp'd out a ſad oath, what women will ſay: The wind is not more boiſtrous, nor more changeable: And again he ſwore to That! If you think it worth your while to wait for ſuch an ungrateful girl as This, I'll engage ſhe'llveer about; I'll engage ſheſhall:And a third time violently ſwore to it. 

Then coming up to me (who had thrown myſelf, very much diſordered by my vehemence, into the contrary window), as if he would have beat me; his face violently working, his hands clenched, and histeeth ſet—Yes, yes, yes, hiſſed the poor gentleman, you ſhall, you ſhall, you ſhall, couſin Clary, be Mr. solmes's; we will ſee that you ſhall; and this in one week at fartheſt.—And then a fourth time he confirmed it. Poor gentleman, how he ſwore!—Strange! that people who have ſuffered in their time ſo much by ſtorms, ſhould be ſo ſtormy!— 

I am ſorry, Sir, ſaid I, to ſee you in ſuch a paſſion. All This, I am but too ſenſible, is owing to my brother's inſtigation; who would not himſelf give the inſtance of duty that is exacted from me. It is beſt for me to withdraw. I ſhall but provoke you farther, I fear: For though I would gladly obey you, if I could, yet This is a point determined with me; and I cannot ſo much aswiſhto get it over. 

How could one help theſe ſtrong declarations, the man in preſence? 

I was going out at the door I came in at; the gentlemen looking upon one another, as if referring to each other what to do, or whether to engage my ſtay, or ſuffer me to go: And who ſhould I meet at the door but my brother, who had heard all that had paſſed. 

Judge my ſurprize, when he bolted upon me ſo unexpectedly, and taking my hand, which he graſped with violence, Return, pretty Miſs, ſaid he; return, if you pleaſe!—You ſhall not yetbe bricked up!—Yourinſtigatingbrother ſhall ſave you from That!—O thou fallen angel, ſaid he, peering up to my downcaſt face,—ſuch a ſweetneſshere!—and ſuch an obſtinacythere,tapping my neck!—O thou true woman!—tho' ſo young—But you ſhall not have your Rake: Remember that; in a loud whiſper, as if he would be decently indecent before the man!—You ſhall be redeemed, and this worthy gentleman, raiſing his voice, will be ſo good as to redeem you from rain—and hereafter you will bleſs him, or have reaſon to bleſs him, for hiscondeſcenſion; that was the brutal brother's word! 

He had led me up to meet Mr. Solmes, whoſe hand he took, as he himſelf held mine. Here, Sir, ſaid he, take the rebel daughter's hand; I give it you now; She ſhall confirm the gift in a week's time; or will have neither father, mother, nor uncles, to boaſt of. 

I ſnatched my hand away. 

How now, Miſs!— 

And how now, Sir—What right have YOU to diſpoſe of my hand?—If you govern every-body elſe, you ſhall not governme; eſpecially in a point ſo immediately relative to myſelf, and in which you neither have, nor ever ſhall have, any thing to do. 

I would have broke from him, but he held my hand too faſt. 

Let me go, Sir;—Why am I thus treated?—Youdeſign,I doubt not, with your unmanly gripings, to hurt me, as you do: But again I ſay, Wherefore is it that I am to be thus treated by YOU? 

He toſſed my hand from him with a whirl, that pained my very ſhoulder. I wept, and held my other hand to the part. 

Mr. Solmes blamed him; ſo did my uncle. 

He had no patience, he ſaid, with ſuch a perverſeneſs; and to think of my reflections upon himſelf, before he entered. He had only given me back the hand, I had not deſerved he ſhould touch. It was ene of my arts, to pretend to be pained. 

Mr. Solmes ſaid, He would ſooner give up all his hopes of me, than that I ſhould be uſed unkindly: And he offered to plead in my behalf to them both; and applied himſelf with a bow, as if for my approbation of his interpoſition. 

But, I ſaid, I am obliged to your intention, Mr. Solmes, to interpoſe to ſave me from my brother's violence: But I cannot wiſh to owe ſo poor an obligation to a man whoſe ungenerous perſeverance is the occaſion, or at leaſt the pretence, ofthatviolence, and of all my diſgraceful ſufferings. 

How generous in you, Mr. Solmes, ſaid my brother to him, to interpoſe in behalf of ſuch an immoveable ſpirit! But I beg of you to perſiſt!—For all our family's ſake, and forherſake too, if you love her, perſiſt!—Let us ſave her, if poſſible, from ruining herſelf. Look at her perſon! Think of her fine qualities!—All the world confeſſes them, and we all gloried in her till now: She is worth ſaving!—And, after two or three more ſtruggles, ſhe will be yours, and, take my word for it, will reward your patience!—Talk not, therefore, of giving up your hopes, for a little whining folly. She has entered upon a parade, which ſhe knows not how to quit with afemalegrace. You have only her pride and her obſtinacy to encounter: And, depend upon it, you will be as happy a man in a fortnight, as a marry'd mancanbe. 

You have heard me ſay, my dear, that my brother has always taken a liberty to reflect upon our Sex, and upon Matrimony!—He would not, if he did not think itwit!—Juſt as poor Mr. Wyerley, and others, we both know, prophane and ridicule Scripture; and all to evidence their pretenſions to the ſame pernicious talent, and to have it thought, that they are too wiſe to be good. 

Mr. Solmes, with a ſelf-ſatisfied air, preſumptuouſly ſaid, He would ſuffer every thing, toobligemy family, and toſaveme. And doubted not to be amply rewarded, could he be ſo happy as to ſucceed at laſt. 

Mr. Solmes, ſaid I, if you have any regard for your own happineſs [Mineis out of the queſtion: You have not generoſity enough to makeThatany part of your ſcheme] proſecute no further your addreſs. It is butjuſtto tell you, that I could not bring my heart to think of you, without the utmoſt diſapprobation,beforeI was uſed as I have been:—And can you think I am ſuch a ſlave, ſuch apoorſlave,as to be brought to change my mind by the violent uſage I have met with? 

And you, Sir, turning to my brother, if you think thatmeekneſsalways indicatestameneſs; and that there is nomagnanimitywithoutbluſter,own yourſelf miſtaken for once: For you ſhall have reaſon to judge from henceforth, that a generous mind is not to be forced; and that— 

He lifted up his hands and eyes: No more, ſaid the imperious wretch, I charge you!—Then turning to my uncle, Do you hear, Sir? This is your once faultleſs niece! This is your favourite! 

Mr. Solmes looked as if he knew not what to think of the matter; and had I been left alone with him, I ſaw plainly, I could have got rid of him eaſily enough. 

My uncle came up to me, looking up to my face, and down to my feet: And is it poſſible This can beyou?All this violence fromyou,Miſs Clary? 

Yes, it is poſſible, Sir—And, I will preſume to ſay, this vehemence on my ſide, is but the natural conſequence of the uſage I have met with, and the rudeneſs I am treated with, even in your preſence, by a brother, who has no more right to controul me, than I have to controul him. 

This uſage, couſin Clary, was not till all other means were try'd with you. 

Try'd!to what end, Sir—Do I contend for any thing more than a mere negative? Youmay,Sir (turning to Mr. Solmes)poſſiblyyou may, be induced theratherto perſevere, thus ungenerouſly, as the uſage, I have met with, for your ſake, and what you have now ſeen offered to me by my brother, will ſhew you what Icanbear, were my evil deſtiny ever to make me yours! 

Lord, Madam, cried Solmes, all this time diſtorted into twenty different attitudes, as my brother and my uncle were bleſſing themſelves, and ſpeaking only toeach other by their eyes, and by their working features; Lord, Madam, what a conſtruction is This! 

A fair conſtruction, Sir, interrupted I: For he that can ſee a perſon he pretends to value, thus treated, and approve of it, muſt be capable of treating her thus himſelf. And that youdoapprove of it, is evident by your declared perſeverance, when you know I am confined, baniſhed, and inſulted in order to make me conſent to be what I nevercan be—And this, let me tell you, as I have often told others, not from motives of obſtinacy, butaverſion. 

Excuſe me, Sir, turning to my uncle!—To you, as to mypapa's brother, I owe duty. I begyourpardon, that I cannot obey you: But as for mybrother; he isbutmy brother; he ſhall not conſtrain me. And, turning to my brother, Knit your brows, Sir, and frown as you will, I will aſk you, Wouldyou,in my caſe, make the ſacrifices I am willing to make, to obtain every one's favour? Ifnot,what right have you to treat me thus? and to procure me to be treated as I have been, for ſo long paſt? 

I had put myſelf by this time into great diſorder. They were ſilent, and ſeemed to want to talk to one another by their looks, walking about in violent diſorders too, between whiles.—I ſat down fanning myſelf (as it happened, againſt the glaſs) and I could perceive my colour go and come; and being ſick to the very heart, and apprehenſive of fainting, I rung. Betty came in. I called for a glaſs of water, and drank it:—But no-hody minded me—I heard my brother pronounce the words, Art! d—d Art! to Solmes; which, I ſuppoſe, kepthimback, together w•th the apprehenſion, that he would not be welcome.—Elſe I could ſee the man was more affected than my brother. And I, ſtill fearing I ſhould faint, riſing, took hold of Betty's arm, ſtaggering with extreme diſorder, yet courteſying to my uncle, Let me hold by you, Betty, ſaid I; Let me withdraw. 

Whither go you, niece, ſaid my uncle? We have not done with you yet. I charge you depart not. Mr. Solmes has ſomething to open to you, that will aſtoniſh you:—And youſhallhear it. 

Only, Sir, by your leave, for a few minutes into the air—I will return, if you command it—I will hear all that I am to hear; that it may be overNow,andfor-Ever.—You will go with me, Betty? 

And ſo, without any farther prohibition, I retired into the garden; and there, caſting myſelf upon the firſt ſeat, and throwing Betty's apron over my face, leaning againſt her ſide, my hands between her's, I gave way to a violent burſt of grief, or paſſion, or both; which, as it ſeemed, ſaved my heart from breaking, for I was ſenſible of an immediate relief. 

I have already given you ſpecimens of Mrs. Betty's impertinence. I ſhall not, therefore, trouble you with more: For the wench, notwithſtanding this my diſtreſs, took great liberties with me, after ſhe ſaw me a little recovered, and as I walked further into the garden; inſomuch, that I was obliged to ſilence her by an abſolute prohibition of ſaying another word to me; and then ſhe dropped behind me quite ſullen and gloomy. 

It was near an hour before I was ſent for in again. The meſſenger was my couſin Dolly Hervey, who, with an eye of compaſſion and reſpect [for Miſs Hervey always loved me, and calls herſelf my ſcholar, as you know] told me, my company was deſired. 

Betty left us. 

Who commands my attendance, Miſs, ſaid I?—Have you not been in tears, my dear? 

Who can forbear tears, ſaid ſhe? 

Why, what's the matter, couſin Dolly?—Sure, nobody is intitled to weep in this family, but I! 

Yes, I am, Madam, ſaid ſhe, becauſe I love you. 

I kiſſed her; And is it for me, my ſweet couſin, that you ſhed tears?—There never was love loſt betweenus: But tell me, what is deſigned to be done with me, that I have this kind inſtance of your compaſſion for me? 

You muſt take no notice of what I tell you: But my mamma has been weeping for you, too, with me; but durſt not let any-body ſee it: O my Dolly, ſaid my mamma, there never was ſo ſet a malice in man, as in your couſin James Harlowe. They will ruin the flower and ornament of their family. 

As how, Miſs Dolly?—Did ſhe not explain herſelf?—As how, my dear? 

Yes, ſhe ſaid, Mr. Solmes would have given up his claim to you; for he ſaid, you hated him, and there were no hopes; and your mamma was willing he ſhould; and to have you taken at your word, to renounce Mr. Lovelace, and to live ſingle: My mamma was for it too; for they heard all that paſſed between you and my uncle Antony, and my couſin James; ſaying, it was impoſſible to think of prevailing upon you to have Mr. Solmes. My uncle Harlowe ſeemed in the ſame way of thinking; at leaſt, my mamma ſays, he did not ſay any thing to the contrary. But your papa was immoveable, and was angry at your mamma and mine upon it: And hereupon your brother, your ſiſter, and my uncle Antony, joined in, and changed the ſcene intirely. In ſhort, ſhe ſays, that Mr. Solmes had great matters ingaged to him. He owned, that you were the fineſt young Lady in England, and he would be content to be but little beloved, if he couldnot,after marriage, engage your heart, for the ſake of having the honour to call you his but for one twelvemonth—I ſuppoſe he would break your heart in the next—For he is a cruel-hearted man, I am ſure. 

My friends may break my heart, couſin Dolly; but Mr. Solmes will never have it in his power. 

I don't know That, Miſs: You'll have good luck to avoid having him, by what I can find; for mymamma ſays, they are all now of one mind, herſelf excepted; and ſhe is forced to be ſilent, your papa and brother are both ſo outragious. 

I am got above minding my brother, couſin Dolly: He isbutmy brother:—But to my papa I owe duty and obedience, if I could comply. 

We are apt to be fond of any-body, who will ſide with us, when oppreſſed, or provoked: I always loved my couſin Dolly; but now ſhe endeared herſelf to me ten times more, by her ſoothing concern for me. I aſked whatſhewould do, were ſhe in my caſe? 

Without heſitation ſhe replied, Have Mr. Lovelace out-of-hand, and take up her own eſtate, if ſhe were me; and there would be an end of it—And Mr. Lovelace, ſhe ſaid, was a fine gentleman;—Mr. Solmes was not worthy tobuckle his ſhoes. 

Miſs Hervey told me further, that her mamma was deſired to come to me, to fetch me in; but ſhe excuſed herſelf. I ſhould have all my friends, ſhe ſaid, ſhe believed, ſit in judgment upon me. 

I wiſh it had been ſo. But, as I have been told ſince, neither my papa, nor my mamma, would truſt themſelves with me: The one for paſſion-ſake, it ſeems; my mamma, for tenderer conſiderations. 

By this time we entered the houſe. Miſs accompanied me into the parlour, and left me, as a perſon devoted, I juſt then thought. 

No-body was there. I ſat down, and had leiſure to weep; reflecting, with a ſad heart, upon what my couſin Dolly had told me. 

They were all in my ſiſter's parlour adjoining: For I heard a confuſed mixture of voices, ſome louder than others, drowning, as it ſeemed, the more compaſſionating accents. 

Femaleaccents I could diſtinguiſh the drowned ones to be. O my dear! What a hard-hearted Sex is the other! Children of the ſame parents, how came they by their cruelty?—Do they get it by travel? Dothey get it by converſation with one another?—Or how do they get it?—Yet my ſiſter too, is as hard-hearted as any of them. But this may be no exception neither: For ſhe has been thought to be maſculine in her air, and in her ſpirit. She has then, perhaps, a ſoul of theotherSex in a body ofours.—And ſo, for the honour ofour own,will I judge of every woman for the future, who, imitating the rougher manners of men, acts unbeſeeming the gentleneſs of her own ſex. 

Forgive me, my dear friend, breaking into my ſtory by theſe reflections. Were I rapidly to purſue my narration, without thinking, without reflecting, I believe I ſhould hardly be able to keep in my right mind: Since vehemence and paſſion would then be always uppermoſt; but while Ithinkas I write, I cool, and my hurry of ſpirits is allayed. 

I believe I was above a quarter of an hour enjoying my own comfortleſs contemplations, before any-body came in to me; for they ſeemed in full debate. My aunt looked in firſt; O my dear, ſaid ſhe, are you there? and withdrew haſtily to appriſe them of it. 

And then (as agreed upon, I ſuppoſe) in came my uncle Antony, crediting Mr. Solmes with the words,Let me lead you in, my dear friend; having hold of his hand; while the new-made Beau aukwardly followed, but more edgingly, as I may ſay, ſetting his feet mincingly, to avoid treading upon his leader's heels. Excuſe me, my dear, this ſeeming levity; but thoſe we do not love, in every thing are ungraceful with us. 

I ſtood up. My uncle looked very ſurly.—Sit down!—ſit down, girl!—And drawing a chair near me, he placed hisdearfriend in it, whether he would or not, I having taken my ſeat. And my uncle ſat on the other ſide of me. 

Well, niece, taking my hand, we ſhall have very little more to ſay to you than we have already ſaid, as to the ſubject that is ſo diſtaſteful to you—Unleſs, indeed, you have better conſidered of the matter—And firſt, let me know if you have? 

The matter wants no conſideration, Sir. 

Very well, very well,Madam!ſaid my uncle, withdrawing his hands from mine: Could I ever have thought of this from you? 

For God's ſake, deareſt Madam, ſaid Mr. Solmes, folding his hands—And there he ſtopped. 

For God's ſake,what,Sir?—How came God's ſake, and your ſake, I pray you, to be the ſame? 

This ſilenc'dhim.My uncle couldonlybe angry; and that he was before. 

Well, well, well, Mr. Solmes, ſaid my uncle, no more of ſupplication. You have not confidence enough to expect a woman's favour. 

He then was pleaſed to hint what great things he had deſigned to do for me; and that it was more formyſake, after he returned from the Indies, than for the ſake of anyotherof the family, that he had reſolved to live a ſingle life.—But now, concluded he, that the perverſe girl deſpiſes all the great things it was once as much in my will, as in my power, to do for her, I will change my meaſures. 

I told him, that I moſt ſincerely thanked him for all his kind intentions to me: But that I was willing to reſign all claim to anyotherof his favours than kind looks, and kind words. 

He looked about him this way and that. 

Mr. Solmes looked pitifully down. 

But both being ſilent, I was ſorry, I added, that I had too much reaſon to ſay a very harſh thing, as it might be thought; which was, That if he would but be pleaſed to convince my brother and ſiſter, that he was abſolutely determined to alter his generous purpoſes towards me, it might poſſibly procure mebetter quarter from both, than I was otherwiſe likely to have. 

My uncle was very much diſpleaſed. But he had not the opportunity to expreſs his diſpleaſure, as he ſeemed prepared to do; for in came my brother in exceeding great wrath; and called me ſeveral vile names. His ſucceſs hitherto, had ſet him above keeping even decent meaſures. 

Was This my ſpiteful conſtruction, he aſked?—Was This the interpretation I put upon his brotherly care of me, and concern for me, in order to prevent my ruining myſelf? 

Itis,indeed itis,ſaid I: I know no other way to account for your late behaviour to me: And before your face, I repeat my requeſt to my uncle, and I will make it to my other uncle, whenever I am permitted to ſee him, that they will confer all their favours upon you, and my ſiſter; and only make me happy [It is all I wiſh for!] in their kind looks, and kind words— 

How they all gazed upon one another!—But could I be leſs peremptory before the man? 

And, as toyourcare and concern for me, Sir, turning to my brother; once more, I deſire it not. You are but my brother. My papa and mamma, I bleſs God, are both living; and, were theynot,you have given me abundant rea•on to ſay, that you are the very laſt perſon I would wiſh to have any concern for me. 

How, Niece? And is a Brother, anonlyBrother, of ſo little conſideration with you, as this comes to? And ought he to have no concern for his ſiſter's honour, and the family's honour? 

Myhonour, Sir!—I deſire none of his concern for That! It never was endanger'd till it had his undeſired concern!—Forgive me, Sir—But when my brother knows how to act like a brother, or behave like a gentleman, he may deſerve more conſideration from me, than it is poſſible for me to think he now does. 

I thought my brother would have beat me upon this—But my uncle ſtood between us. 

Violent girl, however, he called me!—Who, ſaid he, would have thought it of her? 

Then was Mr. Solmes told, that I was unworthy of his purſuit. 

But Mr. Solmes warmly took my part: He could not bear, he ſaid, that I ſhould be treated ſo roughly. 

And ſo very much did he exert himſelf on this occaſion, and ſo patiently was his warmth received by my brother, that I began to ſuſpect, that it was a contrivance to make me think myſelf obliged to him; and that it might, perhaps, be one end of the preſſed-for interview. 

The very ſuſpicion of this low artifice, violent as I was thought to be before, put me ſtill more out of patience; and my uncle and my brother again praiſing his wonderful generoſity, and his noble return of good for evil, You are a happy man, Mr. Solmes, ſaid I, that you can ſoeaſilyconfer obligations upon a whole family, except one ingrateful perſon of it, whom you ſeem to intendmoſtto oblige; but who, being made unhappy by your favour, deſerves not to owe toyouany protection from the violence of a brother. 

Then was I a rude, an ingrateful, an unworthy creature. 

I own it all!—All, all you can call me, or think me, brother, do I own. I own my own unworthineſs with regard to This gentleman: I take your word for his abundant merit, which I have neither leiſure nor inclination to examine into—It may, perhaps, be as great as your own—But yet I cannot thank him for his mediation: For who ſees not, looking at my uncle, that this is giving himſelf a merit with everybody at my expence? 

Then turning to my brother, who ſeemed ſurpriſed into ſilence by my warmth, I muſt alſo acknowlege,Sir, the favour ofyourſuperabundant care for me. But I diſcharge you of it; at leaſt, while I have the happineſs of nearer and dearer relations. You have given me no reaſon to think better ofyourprudence, than of myown.I am independent ofYou,Sir; tho' I never deſire to be ſo of my Father: And altho' I wiſh for the good opinion of my Uncles, it isAllI wiſh for from Them: And This, Sir, I repeat, to make you and my ſiſter eaſy. 

Inſtantly almoſt came in Betty, in a great hurry, looking at me as ſpitefully as if ſhe were myſiſter:Sir, ſaid ſhe to my brother, my maſter deſires to ſpeak to you this moment at the door. 

He went to that which led into my ſiſter's parlour; and this ſentence I heard thundered from the mouth of one who had a right to all my reverence: Son James, let the rebel be this moment carried away to my brother's—This very moment—She ſhall not ſtay one hour more under my roof! 

I trembled; I was ready to ſink. Yet, not knowing what I did, or ſaid, I flew to the door, and would have opened it—But my brother pulled it to, and held it cloſe by the key—O my papa!—my dear papa, ſaid I, falling upon my knees, at the door—admit your child to your preſence!—Let me but plead my cauſe at your feet!—O reprobate not thus your diſtreſſed daughter! 

My uncle put his handkerchief to his eyes: Mr. Solmes made a ſtill more grievous face than he had before. But my brother's marble heart was untouched. 

I will not ſtir from my knees, continued I, without admiſſion.—At this door I beg it!—O let it be the door of mercy! And open it to me, honoured Sir, I beſeech you!—But this once, this once! altho' you were afterwards to ſhut it againſt me for ever! 

The door was endeavoured to be opened on the inſide, which made my brother let go the key on aſudden, and I preſſing againſt it (all the time remaining on my knees) fell flat on my face into the other parlour; however, without hurting myſelf. But everybody was gone, except Betty, who helped to raiſe me up; and I looked round that apartment, and ſeeing nobody there, re-entered the other, leaning upon Betty; and then threw myſelf into the chair which I had ſat in before; and my eyes overflowed, to my great relief: While my uncle Antony, my brother, and Mr. Solmes, left me, and went to my other relations. 

What paſſed among them, I know not: But my brother came in by the time I had tolerably recovered myſelf, with a ſettled and haughty gloom upon his brow—Your father and mother command you inſtantly to prepare for your uncle Antony's. You need not be ſolicitous about what you ſhall take with you. You may give Betty your keys: Take them, Betty, if the perverſe-one has them about her, and carry them to her mother. She will take care to ſend every thing after you that you ſhall want. But another night you will not be permitted to ſtay in this houſe. 

I don't chooſe to give my keys to any-body, except to my mamma, and into her own hands. You ſee how much I am diſordered. It may coſt me my life, to be hurried away ſo ſuddenly. I beg to be indulged, till next Monday at leaſt. 

That will not be granted you. So prepare for this very night. And give up your keys. Give them tome,Miſs. I'll carry them to your mamma. 

Excuſe me, brother. Indeed, I won't. 

Indeed you muſt. In no one inſtance comply, Madam Clary? 

Not in this, Sir. 

Have you any thing you are afraid ſhould be ſeen by your mamma? 

Not, if I be permitted to attend my mamma. 

I'll make a report accordingly. 

He went out. 

In came Miſs Dolly Hervey: I am ſorry, Madam, to be the meſſenger!—But your mamma inſiſts upon your ſending up all the keys of your cabinet, library, and drawers. 

Tell my mamma, that I yield them up to her commands; Tell her, I make no conditions with my mamma: But if ſhe finds nothing ſhe diſapproves of, I beg that ſhe will permit me to tarry here a few days longer.—Try, my Dolly [the dear girl ſobbing with grief]; Try, if your gentleneſs cannot prevail for me. 

She wept ſtill more, and ſaid, It is ſad, very ſad, to ſee matters thus carried! 

She took the keys, and wrapped her arms about me; and begged me to excuſe her.—And would have ſaid more; but Betty's preſence awed her, as I ſaw. 

Don't pity me, my dear, ſaid I. It will be imputed to you as a fault. You ſee who is by. 

The inſolent wench ſcornfully ſmiled: One young Lady pitying another in things of this nature, looks promiſing in the youngeſt, I muſt needs ſay. 

I bid her, for a ſaucy creature, begone from my preſence. 

She would moſt gladly, ſhe ſaid, were ſhe not to ſtay about me by my mamma's order. 

It ſoon appeared for what ſhe ſtaid; for I offering to go up ſtairs to my apartment when my couſin went from me with the keys, ſhe told me ſhe was commanded, (to her very great regret, ſhe muſt own) to desire me not to go up at preſent. 

Such a bold-face, as ſhe, I told her, ſhould not hinder me. 

She inſtantly rang the bell, and in came my brother, meeting me at the door. 

Return, return, Miſs—No going up yet. 

I went in again, and throwing myſelf upon the window-ſeat, wept bitterly. 

Shall I give you the particulars of a ridiculouſly ſpiteful converſation that paſſed between my brotherand me, while he, with Betty, was in office to keep me in play, and my cloſet was ſearching?—But I think I will not. It can anſwer no good end. 

I deſired ſeveral times, while he ſtay'd, to have leave to retire to my apartment; but it was not permitted me. The ſearch, I ſuppoſe, was not over. Bella was one of thoſe employ'd in it. They could not have a more diligent ſearcher. How happy it was they were diſappointed! 

But when my ſiſter could not find thecunning creature's papers; I was to ſtand another viſit from Mr. Solmes—preceded now by my aunt Hervey, ſorely againſt her will, I could ſee that; accompany'd by my uncle Antony, in order to keep her ſteady, I ſuppoſe. 

But being a little heavy (for it is now paſt Two in the morning), I will lie down in my cloaths, to indulge the kind ſummons, if it will be indulged. 

Three o'Clock, Wedneſday Morning.I COULD not ſleep—Only dozed away one half-hour. 

My aunt Hervey accoſted me thus—O my dear child, what troubles do you give to your parents, and to every-body!—I wonder at you! 

I am ſorry for it, Madam. 

Sorry for it, child!—Whythen ſo very obſtinate?—Come, ſit down, my dear. I will ſit next you, taking my hand. 

My uncle placed Mr. Solmes on the other ſide of me: Himſelf over-againſt me, almoſt cloſe to me. Finely beſet now, my dear! Was I not? 

Your brother, child, ſaid my aunt, is too paſſionate—His zeal foryourwelfare puſhes him on a little too vehemently. 

Very true, ſaid my uncle: But no more of This. We would now be glad to ſee if milder means will do with you—Tho', indeed, they were tried before. 

I aſked my aunt, If it were neceſſary, that That gentleman ſhould be preſent? 

There is a reaſon, that he ſhould, ſaid my aunt, as you will hear by-and-by. But I muſt tell you, firſt, that, thinking you was a little too angrily treated by your brother, your mamma deſired me to try what gentler means would do upon a ſpirit ſo generous as we uſed to think yours. 

Nothing can be done, Madam, I muſt preſume to ſay, if This gentleman's addreſs be the end. 

She looked upon my uncle, who bit his lip, and looked upon Mr. Solmes, who rubbed his cheek; and ſhaking her head, Good, dear creature, ſaid ſhe, be calm:—Let me aſk you, If ſomething would have been done, had you been gentler uſed, than you ſeem to think you have been? 

No, Madam, I cannot ſay it would, in this gentleman's favour. You know, Madam, you know, Sir, to my uncle, I ever valued myſelf upon my ſincerity: And once, indeed, had the happineſs to be valued for it. 

My uncle took Mr. Solmes aſide. I heard him ſay, whiſperingly, She muſt, ſhe ſhall, be ſtill yours!—We'll ſee, who'll conquer, parents, or child, uncles, or niece!—I doubt not to be witneſs to all this being got over, and many a good-humour'd jeſt made of this high phrenſy! 

I was heartily vexed. 

Tho' we cannot find out, continued he, yet weguess,who puts her upon this obſtinate behaviour. It is not natural to her, man. Nor would I concern myſelf ſo much about her, but that I know what I ſay to be true, and intend to do great things for her. 

I will hourly pray for that happy time, whiſper'd, as audibly, Mr. Solmes. I never will revive the remembrance of what is now ſo painful to me. 

Well, but, niece, I am to tell you, ſaid my aunt, that the ſending up your keys, without making any conditions, has wrought for you what nothing elſecould have done.—That, and the not finding anything that could give them umbrage, together with Mr. Solmes's interpoſition— 

O, Madam, let me not owe an obligation to Mr. Solmes.—I cannot repay it, except by mythanks; andthoſeonly on condition that he will decline his ſuit. To my thanks, Sir, (turning to him) if you have a heart capable of humanity, if you have any eſteem for me, for myownſake, I beſeech you to intitle yourſelf!—I beſeech you, do!— 

O Madam, cry'd he, believe, believe, believe me, it is impoſſible!—While you are ſingle, I will hope. While that hope is encouraged by ſo many worthy friends, I muſt perſevere!—I muſt not ſlightthem,Madam, becauſe you ſlightme. 

I anſwered him with a look of high diſdain; and, turning from him—But what favour, dear Madam, (to my aunt) has the inſtance of duty you mention procur'd me? 

Your mamma and Mr. Solmes, replied my aunt, have prevailed, that your requeſt, to ſtay here till Monday next, ſhall be granted, if you will promiſe to go chearfully then. 

Let me but chooſe my own viſitors, and I will go to my uncle's houſe with pleaſure. 

Well, niece, ſaid my aunt, we muſt wave this ſubject, I find. We will now proceed to another, which will require your utmoſt attention. It will give you the reaſon why Mr. Solmes's preſence is requiſite.— 

Ay, ſaid my uncle, and ſhew you what ſort of a man Somebody is. Mr. Solmes, pray favour us, in the firſt place, with the letter you received from your anonymous friend. 

I will, Sir. And out he pulled a letter-caſe, and, taking out a letter, It is written in anſwer to one ſent to the perſon. It is ſuperſcribed,To Roger Solmes,Eſq.It begins thus:Honoured Sir— 

I beg your pardon, Sir, ſaid I: But what, pray, is the intent of reading this letter to me? 

To let you know, what a vile man you are thought to have ſet your heart upon, ſaid my uncle, in an audible whiſper. 

If, Sir, it be ſuſpected, that I have ſet my heart upon any other, why is Mr. Solmes to give himſelf any farther trouble about me? 

Only hear, niece, ſaid my aunt: Only hear what Mr. Solmes has to read, and to ſay to you, on this head. 

If, Madam, Mr. Solmes will be pleaſed to declare, that he has no view to ſerve, no end to promote, for himſelf, I will hear any thing he ſhall read. But if the contrary, you muſt allow me to ſay, That it will abate with me a great deal of the weight of whatever he ſhall produce. 

Hear it but read, niece, ſaid my aunt.— 

Hear it read, ſaid my uncle.—You are ſo ready to take part with— 

With any-body, Sir, that is accuſed anonymouſly; and from intereſted motives. 

He began to read; and there ſeemed to be a heavy load of charges in this letter, againſt the poor criminal: But I ſtopped the reading of it, and ſaid, It will not bemyfault, if this vilified man be not as indifferent to me, as one whom I never ſaw. If he be otherwiſe at preſent, which I neither own, nor deny, it proceeds from the ſtrange methods taken to prevent it. Do not let one cauſe unite him and me, and we ſhall not be united. If my offer to live ſingle be accepted, he ſhall be no more to me thanthisgentleman. 

Still—Proceed, Mr. Solmes—Hear it out, niece, was my uncle's cry. 

But, to what purpoſe, Sir? ſaid I—Has not Mr. Solmes aviewin this? And, beſides, can any-thingworſe be ſaid of Mr. Lovelace, than I have heard ſaid for ſeveral months paſt? 

But this, ſaid my uncle, and what Mr. Solmes can tell you beſides, amounts to thefulleſt proof— 

Was the unhappy man, then, ſo freely treated in his character before,withoutfull proof? I beſeech you, Sir, give me nottoo goodan opinion of Mr. Lovelace; as I may have, if ſuch pains be taken to make him guilty, by one who means not his reformation by it; nor to do good, if I may preſume to ſay ſo in this caſe, to any-body but himſelf. 

I ſee very plainly, ſaid my uncle, your prepoſſeſſion, your fond prepoſſeſſion, for the perſon of a man without morals. 

Indeed, my dear, ſaid my aunt, you too much juſtify all our apprehenſions. Surprising! that a young creature of virtue and honour ſhould thus eſteem a man of a quite oppoſite character! 

Dear Madam, do not conclude againſt me too haſtily. I believe Mr. Lovelace is far from being ſo good as he ought to be: But if every man's private life were ſearched into byprejudiced people,ſet on for that purpoſe, I know not whoſe reputation would be ſafe. I love a virtuous character, as much in man, as in woman. I think it as requiſite, and as meritorious, in the one as in the other. And, if left to myſelf, I would prefer a perſon of ſuch a character to Royalty, without it. 

Why then, ſaid my uncle— 

Give me leave, Sir—But I may venture to ſay, that many of thoſe who have eſcaped cenſure, have not merited applauſe. 

Permit me to obſerve further, That Mr. Solmes himself may not be abſolutely faultleſs. I never heard of his virtues. Some vices I have heard of—Excuſe me, Mr. Solmes, I ſpeak to your face—The text aboutcaſting the firſt ſtoneaffords an excellent leſſon. 

He looked down; but was ſilent. 

Mr. Lovelace may have vicesyouhave not. You may have others, whichhehas not.—I ſpeak not this to defend him, or to accuſe you. No man is bad, no one is good, inevery-thing.Mr. Lovelace, for example, is ſaid to be implacable, and to hate my friends; that does not make me value him the more. But give me leave to ſay, That they hatehimas bad. Mr. Solmes has his antipathies, likewiſe, veryſtrongones! and thoſe to hisown relations!which I don't find to be the other's fault; for he lives well withhis.—Yet he may have as bad:—Worſe, pardon me, he cannot have, in my poor opinion: For what muſt be the man, whohates his own fleſh? 

You know not, Madam; All in one breath. 

You know not, Niece; All in one breath. 

You know not, Clary; All in one breath. 

I may not, nor do I deſire to know his reaſons: It concerns me not to know them: But the world, even the impartial part of it, accuſes him. If the world is unjuſt, or raſh, inoneman's caſe, why may it not be ſo inanother's? That's all I mean by it. Nor can there be a greater ſign of want of merit, than where a man ſeeks to pull down another's character, in order to build up his own. 

The poor man's face was all this time overſpread with confuſion; it appearing as if he were ready to cry; twiſted, as it were, and all awry, neither mouth nor noſe ſtanding in the middle of it. And had he been capable of pitying me, I had certainly tried to pity him. 

They all three gazed upon one another in ſilence. My aunt, I ſaw (at leaſt I thought ſo), looked as if ſhe would have been glad ſhe might have appeared to approve of what I ſaid. She but feebly blamed me, when ſhe ſpoke, for not hearing what Mr. Solmes had to ſay. He himſelf ſeemed not now very earneſt to be heard. My uncle ſaid, There was no talking to me. And I ſhouldhave abſolutely ſilenced both gentlemen, had not my brother come in again to their aſſiſtance. 

This was the ſtrange ſpeech he made at his entrance his eyes flaming with anger; This prating girl has ſtruck you all dumb, I perceive. Perſevere however, Mr. Solmes. I have heard every word ſhe has ſaid: And I know no other method of being even with her, than, after ſhe is yours, to make her as ſenſible of your power, as ſhe now makes you of her inſolence. 

Fie, couſin Harlowe! ſaid my aunt—Could I have thought abrotherwould have ſaid this to a gentleman, of aſiſter? 

I muſt, tell you, Madam, ſaid he, thatyougive the rebel courage. You yourſelf ſeem to favour too much the arrogance of her ſex in her; otherwiſe ſhe durſt not have thus ſtopp'd her uncle's mouth by reflections upon him; as well as denied to hear a gentleman tell her the danger ſhe is in from a libertine, whoſe protection, as ſhe has plainly hinted, ſhe intends to claim againſt her family. 

Stopped my uncle's mouth, by reflexions upon him, Sir!ſaid I, How can that be! Howdareyou to make ſuch an application as This! 

My aunt wept at his reflection upon her.—Couſin, ſaid ſhe to him, IfThisbe the thanks I have for my trouble, I have done: Your father would not treat me thus:—And Iwillſay, that the hint you gave was an unbrotherly one. 

Not more unbrotherly than all the reſt of his conduct to me, of late, Madam, ſaid I. I ſee, by this ſpecimen of his violence, how every-body has been brought into his meaſures. Had I any the leaſt apprehenſion of ever being in Mr. Solmes's power, thismighthave affected me. But you ſee, Sir, to Mr. Solmes, what a conduct is thought neceſſary to enable you to arrive at your ungenerous end. You ſee how my brothercourtsfor you! 

I diſclaim Mr. Harlowe's violence, Madam, with all my ſoul. I will never remind you— 

Silence, worthy Sir! ſaid I; I will take care you never ſhall have the opportunity. 

Leſs violence, Clary, ſaid my uncle. Couſin James, you are as much to blame as your ſiſter. 

In then came my ſiſter. Brother, ſaid ſhe, you kept not your promiſe. You are thought to be to blame within, as well as here. Were not Mr. Solmes's generoſity and affection to the girlwellknown, what you have ſaid would be inexcuſable. My papa deſires to ſpeak with you; and with you, aunt; and with you, uncle; and with you, Mr. Solmes, if you pleaſe. 

They all four withdrew into the next apartment. 

I ſtood ſilent, as not knowing, till ſhe ſpoke, how to take this intervention of my ſiſter's.—O thou perverſe thing, ſaid ſhe, (poking out her angry face at me, when they were all gone, but ſpeaking ſpitefully low)—What troubles do you give to us all! 

You and my brother, Bella, ſaid I, give trouble to yourſelves; for neither you nor he have any buſineſs to concern yourſelves about me. 

She threw out ſome ſpiteful expreſſions, ſtill in a low voice, as if ſhe choſe not to be heard without; and I thought it beſt to oblige her to raiſe her tone a little, if I could. If Icould,did I ſay? It is eaſy to make a paſſionate ſpirit anſwer all our views upon it. 

She accordingly flamed out in a raiſed tone: And this brought my couſin Dolly in to us. Miſs Harlowe, your company is deſired. 

I will come preſently, couſin Dolly. 

But again provoking a ſeverity from me which ſhe could not bear, and calling me names; in once more came Dolly, with another meſſage, that her company was deſired. 

Not mine, I doubt, Miſs Dolly, ſaid I. 

The ſweet-temper'd girl burſt out into tears, and ſhook her head. 

Go in before me, child, ſaid Bella (vexed to set her concern for me), with thy ſharp face like a new moon: What doſt thou cry for? Is it to make thy keen face look ſtill keener? 

I believe Bella was blamed, too, when ſhe went in; for I heard her ſay, Thecreaturewas ſo provoking there was no keeping a reſolution. 

Mr. Solmes, after a little while, came in again by himſelf, to take leave of me: Full of ſcrapes and compliments; but too well tutored and encouraged, to give me hope of his declining. He begged me not to impute to him any of the ſevere things to which he had been a ſorrowful witneſs. He beſought my compaſſion, as he called it. 

He ſaid, the reſult was, That he had ſtill hopes given him; and, altho' diſcouraged by me, he was reſolved to perſevere, while I remained ſingle:—And ſuch long and ſuch painful ſervices he talk'd of, as never were heard of. 

I told him, in the ſtrongeſt manner, what he had to truſt to. 

Yet ſtill he determined to perſiſt.—While I was no man's elſe, he muſt hope. 

What! ſaid I, will you ſtill perſiſt, when I declare, as I now do, that my affections are engaged?—And let my brother make the moſt of it.— 

He knew my principles, and adored me for them. 

He doubted not, that it was in his power to make me happy: And he was ſure I would not want the will to be ſo. 

I aſſured him, that, were I to be carried to my uncle's, it ſhould anſwer no end; for I would never ſee him; nor receive a line from him; nor hear a word in his favour, whoever were the perſon who ſhould mention him to me. 

He was ſorry for it. He muſt be miſerable, were I to hold in that mind. But he doubted not, that I might be induced by my father and uncles to change it.— 

Never, never, he might depend upon it. 

It was richly worth his patience, and the trial. 

At myexpence?—At the price of all myhappineſs,Sir? 

He hoped I ſhould be induced to think otherwiſe. 

And then would he have run into his fortune, his ſettlements, his affection—Vowing, that never man loved a woman with ſo ſincere a paſſion, as he loved me. 

I ſtopp'd him, as to the firſt part of his ſpeech: And to the ſecond, of the ſincerity of his paſſion;—What then, Sir, ſaid I, is your love to one, who muſt aſſure you, that never young creature looked upon man with a ſincerer diſapprobation, than I look upon you: And tell me, What argument can you urge, that thistruedeclaration anſwers not beforehand? 

Deareſt Madam, what can I ſay?—On my knees I beg— 

And down the ungraceful wretch dropp'd on his knees. 

Let me not kneel in vain, Madam: Let me not be thus deſpiſed.—And he looked moſt odiouſly ſorrowful. 

I have kneeled too, Mr. Solmes: Often have I kneeled: And I will kneel again—Even toyou,Sir, will I kneel, if there be ſo much merit in kneeling; provided you will not be the implement of my cruel brother's undeserved perſecution.— 

If all the ſervices, even to worſhip you during my whole life—You, Madam, invoke and expect mercy, yet ſhew none— 

Am I to be cruel to myſelf, to ſhew mercy to you?—Take my eſtate, Sir, with all my heart, ſince you are ſuch a favourite in This houſe!—Only leave memyſelf—The mercy you aſk for, doyouſhew to others. 

It you mean to my relations, Madam—unworthy as they are, all ſhall be done that you shall preſcribe. 

Who, I, Sir, to find you bowels you naturally have not? I to purchaſetheirhappineſs, by the forfeitureofmy own? What I aſk you for, is mercy to myſelf: That, ſince you ſeem to have ſome power over my relations, you will uſe it in my behalf. Tell them, that you ſee I cannot conquer my averſion to you: Tell them, if you are a wiſe man, that you value too much your own happineſs, to riſque it againſt ſuch a determin'd antipathy: Tell them, that I am unworthy of your offers: And that, in mercy to yourſelf, as well as to me, you will not proſecute a ſuit ſo impoſſible to be granted. 

I will riſque all conſequences, ſaid the fell wretch, riſing, with a countenance whiten'd over, as if with malice, his hollow eyes flaſhing fire, and biting his under-lip, to ſhew he could bemanly.Your hatred, Madam, ſhall be no objection with me: And I doubt not in a few days to have it in my power to ſhew you— 

YOU have it in your power, Sir— 

He came well off—To ſhew youmore generoſity, than, noble as you are ſaid to be to others, you ſhew to me. 

The man's face became his anger: It ſeems form'd to expreſs the paſſion. 

At that inſtant, again came in my brother—Siſter, ſiſter, ſiſter, ſaid he, with his teeth ſet, act on the termagant part you have ſo newly aſſumed—Moſt wonderfully well does it become you. It is but a ſhort one, however. Tyranneſs in your turn! accuſe others of your own guilt!—But leave her, leave her, Mr. Solmes; her time is ſhort. You'll find her humble and mortify'd enough very quickly!—Then, how like a little tame fool will ſhe look, with her conſcience upbraiding her, and begging of you [with a whining voice, the barbarous brother ſpoke] to forgive and forget!— 

More he ſaid, as he flew out, with a face as red as ſcarlet, upon Shorey's coming in to recal him, on his violence. 

I removed from chair to chair, exceſſively frighted and diſturbed, at this brutal treatment. 

The man attempted to excuſe himſelf, as being ſorry for my brother's paſſion. 

Leave me, leave me, Sir, fanning—or I ſhall faint. And indeed I thought I ſhould. 

He recommended himſelf to my favour with an air of aſſurance; augmented, as I thought, by a diſtreſs ſo viſible in me; for he even ſnatched my trembling, my ſtruggling hand; and raviſh'd it to his odious mouth. 

I flung from him with high diſdain: And he withdrew, bowing and cringing; ſelf-gratify'd, and enjoying, as I thought, the confuſion he ſaw me in. 

The creature is now, methinks, before me; and now I ſee him aukwardly ſtriding backward, as he retired, till the edge of the open'd door, which he run againſt, remember'd him to turn his welcome back upon me. 

Upon his withdrawing, Betty brought me word, that I was permitted to go up to my own chamber: And was bid to conſider of every-thing: For my time was ſhort. Nevertheleſs, ſhe believed I might be permitted to ſtay till Saturday. 

She tells me, That altho' my brother and ſiſter were blam'd for being ſohaſtywith me, yet when they madetheirreport, and my uncle Antonyhis,of my provocations, they were all more determin'd than ever in Mr. Solmes's favour. 

The wretch himſelf, ſhe tells me, pretends to be more in love with me than before; and to be rather delighted, than diſcouraged, with the converſation that paſſed between us. He run on, ſhe ſays, in raptures, about the grace wherewith I ſhould dignify his board; and the like ſort of ſtuff, either ofhisſaying, orhermaking. 

She cloſed all with a Now is my time to ſubmit with a grace, and to make my own terms with him:—Elſe,ſhecan tell me, wereſheMr. Solmes, it ſhould be worſe for me: And who, Miſs, ofourſex, proceeded the ſaucy creature, would admire a rakiſh gentleman, when ſhe might be admired by a ſober one to the end of the chapter? 

The creature tells me, I have hadamazinggood luck, to keep my writings concealed ſo cunningly▪I muſt needs think, that ſhe knows I am always at my pen: And as I endeavour to hide that knowlege from her, ſhe is not obliged to keep my ſecret. But that ſhe loves not to aggravate. She had rather reconcile by much. Peace-making is her talent, and ever was. And had ſhe been as much my foe, as I imagined, I had not perhaps been here now.—But this, however, ſhe ſaid not to make a merit with me: For, truly, it would be better for me the ſooner everything was over with me. And better for her, and every-one elſe; that was certain.—Yet one hint ſhe muſt conclude with; that my pen and ink, ſhe would aſſure me (ſoon as I was to go away), would not be long in my power. And then, having loſtthatamuſement, it would be ſeen, how a mind ſo active as mine, would be able to employ itſelf. 

This hint has ſuch an effect upon me, that I ſhall inſtantly begin to conceal, in different places, pens, ink, and paper; and to depoſite ſome in the ivy-ſummer-houſe, if I can find a ſafe place; and, at the worſt, I have got a pencil of black, and another of red, lead, which I uſe in my drawings; and my patterns ſhall ſerve for paper, if I have no other. 

How lucky it was, that I had got away my papers! They made a ſtrict ſearch for them; That I can ſee, by the diſorderly manner they have left all things in: For you know that I am ſuch an obſerver of method, that I can go to a bit of ribband, or lace, or edging, blindfold: The ſame in my books; which they have ſtrangely diſordered and miſmatched, to lookbehindthem, andinſome of them, I ſuppoſe. My cloaths,too, are rumpled not a little. No place has eſcaped them. To your hint, I thank you, are they indebted for their diſappointment. 

The pen, thro' heavineſs and fatigue, dropp'd out of my fingers, at the wordindebted.I reſume it, to finiſh the ſentence; and to tell you, that I am, 

Your for-ever obliged and affectionate CL. HARLOWE.LETTER XXXII. MiſsCLARISSA HARLOWE,To MiſsHOWE.
Wednesday, Eleven o' Clock, April 5.I Muſt write as I have opportunity; making uſe of my concealed ſtores: For my pens and ink (all of each, that they could find) are taken from me; as I ſhall tell you more particularly by-and-by. 

About an hour ago, I depoſited my long letter to you; as alſo, in the uſual place, a billet to Mr. Lovelace, leſt his impatience ſhould put him upon ſome raſhneſs; ſignifying, in four lines,'That the interview was over; and that I hoped my ſteady refuſal of Mr. Solmes would diſcourage any further applications to me in his favour.' 

Altho' I was unable, through the fatigue I had undegone, and by reaſon of ſitting up all night to write to you, (which made me lie longer than ordinary this morning) to depoſit my letter to you ſooner; yet I hope you will have it in ſuch good time, as that you will be able to ſend me an anſwer to it this night, or in the morning early; which, if ever ſo ſhort, will inform me, whether I may depend upon your mamma's indulgence, or not. This it behoves me to know as ſoon as poſſible; for they are reſolved to hurry me away on Saturday next, at fartheſt; perhaps to-morrow. 

I will now inform you of all that happen'd previousto their taking away my pen and ink, as well as of the manner in which that act of violence, as I may call it, was committed; and this as briefly as I can. 

My aunt, (who with Mr. Solmes, and my two uncles) lives here, I think, came up to me, and ſaid, ſhe would fain have me hear what Mr. Solmes had to ſay of Mr. Lovelace—Only that I might be appriſed of ſome things, that would convince me what a vile man he is, and what a wretched huſband he muſt make.—I might give them what degree of credit I pleaſed; and take them with abatement for Mr. Solmes's intereſtedneſs, if I thought fit.—But it might be of uſe to me, were it but to queſtion Mr. Lovelace indirectly upon ſome of them, that related tomyſelf. 

I was indifferent, I ſaid, about what he could ſay of me, as I was ſure it could not be to my diſadvantage; and ashehad no reaſon to impute to me the forwardneſs which my unkind friends had ſo cauſeleſly taxed me with. 

She ſaid, That he gave himſelf high airs on account of his family; and ſpoke as deſpicably of ours, as if an alliance withuswere beneath him. 

I reply'd, That he was a very unworthy man, if it were true, to ſpeak ſlightingly of a family, which was as good as his own, 'bating that it was not allied to the peerage: That the dignity itſelf, I thought, convey'd more ſhame than honour to deſcendents, who had not merit to adorn, as well as to be adorned by it: That my brother's abſurd pride, indeed, which made him every-where declare, he would never marry but toquality,gave a diſgraceful preference againſt ours: But that were I to be aſſured, that Mr. Lovelace were capable of ſo mean a pride, as to inſult us, or value himſelf, on ſuch an accidental advantage, I ſhould think as deſpicably of his ſenſe, as every-body elſe did of his morals. 

She inſiſted upon it, that hehadtaken ſuch liberties;and offer'd to give ſome inſtances, which, ſhe ſaid, would ſurpriſe me. 

I anſwer'd, That were it ever ſo certain, that Mr. Lovelace had taken ſuch liberties, it would be but common juſtice, (ſo much hated as he was by all our family, and ſo much inveighed againſt in all companies by them) to inquire into the provocation he had to ſay what was imputed to him; and whether the value ſome of my friends put upon the riches they poſſeſs, (throwing perhaps contempt upon every other advantage, and even diſcreditingtheir ownpretenſions to family, in order to depreciatehis) might not provoke him to like contempts. Upon the whole, Madam, ſaid I, can you ſay, that the inveteracy lies not as much onourſide, as onhis?Canheſay any-thing ofusmore diſreſpectful, thanweſay of him?—And as to the ſuggeſtion, ſo often repeated, that he would make a bad huſband, is it poſſible for him to uſe a wife worſe than I am uſed; particularly by my brother and ſiſter? 

Ah, niece! ah, my dear! how firmly has this wicked man attached you! 

Perhaps not, Madam. But really great care ſhould be taken by fathers and mothers, when they would have their daughters oftheirminds in theſe particulars, not to ſay things that ſhall neceſſitate the child, in honour and generoſity, to take part with the man her friends are averſe to. But, waving all this, as I have offered to renounce him for ever, I ſee not why he ſhould be mentioned to me, nor why I ſhould be wiſhed to hear any-thing about him. 

Well, but ſtill, my dear, there can be no harm to let Mr. Solmes tell you what Mr. Lovelace has ſaid ofyou.Severely as you have treated Mr. Solmes, he is fond of attending you once more: He begs to be heard on this head. 

If it be proper for me to hear it, Madam— 

Itis,eagerly interrupted ſhe, very proper. 

Has what he has ſaid ofme,Madam, convincedyouof Mr. Lovelace's baſeneſs? 

It has, my dear: And that you ought to abhor him for it. 

Then, dear Madam, be pleaſed to let me hear it fromyourmouth: There is no need that I ſhould ſee Mr.Solmes,when it will have double the weight fromyou.What, Madam, has the man dared to ſay ofme? 

My aunt was quite at a loſs. 

At laſt, Well, ſaid ſhe, I ſee how you are attached I am ſorry for it, Miſs. For I do aſſure you, it will ſignify nothing. You muſt be Mrs. Solmes; and that in a very few days. 

If conſent of heart, and aſſent of voice, be neceſſary to a marriage, I am ſure I never can, nor ever will be married to Mr. Solmes. And what will any of my relations be anſwerable for, if they force my hand into his, and hold it there till the Service be read; I perhaps inſenſible, and in fits, all the time? 

What a romantic picture of a forced marriage have you drawn, niece! Some people would ſay, you have given a fine deſcription of your own obſtinacy, child. 

My brother and ſiſter would: But you, Madam diſtinguiſh, I am ſure, between obſtinacy and averſion. 

Suppoſed averſion may owe its riſe to real obſtinacy my dear. 

I know my own heart, Madam. I wiſhyoudid. 

Well, but ſee Mr. Solmes, once more, niece. It wil•oblige, and make for you, more than you imagine. 

What ſhould I ſee him for, Madam?—Is the man fond of hearing me declare my averſion to him?—Is he deſirous of having me more and more incenſe my friends againſt myſelf?—O my cunning, my ambition brother! 

Ah, my dear!—with a look of pity, as if ſhe underſtood the meaning of my exclamation:—But muſ•That neceſſarily be the caſe? 

It muſt, Madam, if they will take offence at me for declaring my ſtedfaſt deteſtation of Mr. Solmes, as a huſband. 

Mr. Solmes is to be pitied, ſaid ſhe. He adores you. He longs to ſee you once more. He loves you the better for your cruel uſage of him yeſterday. He is in raptures about you. 

Ugly creature, thought I! He in raptures!— 

What a cruel wretch muſt He be, ſaid I, who can enjoy the diſtreſs he ſo largely contributes to!—But I ſee, I ſee, Madam, that I am conſider'd as an animal to be baited, to make ſport for my brother, and ſiſter, and Mr. Solmes. They are all, all of them, wanton in their cruelty.—I,Madam, ſee the man!—the man ſo incapable of pity!—Indeed I won't ſee him, if I can help it.—Indeed I won't. 

What a conſtruction does your lively wit put upon the admiration Mr. Solmes expreſſes of you!—Paſſionate as you were yeſterday, and contemptuouſly as you treated him, he dotes upon you for the very ſeverity he ſuffers by. He is not ſo ungenerous a man as you think him: Nor has he an unfeeling heart.—Let me prevail upon you, my dear (as yourfatherandmotherexpect it of you), to ſee him once more, and hear what he has to ſay to you.— 

How can I conſent to ſee him again, when yeſterday's interview was interpreted by you, Madam, as well as by every other, as an encouragement to him? When I myſelf declared, that if I ſaw him aſecondtime by my own conſent, it might be ſo taken? And when I am determined never to encourage him? 

You might ſpare your reflections uponme,Miſs. I have no thanks either from one ſide, or the other. 

And away ſhe flung. 

Deareſt Madam! ſaid I, following her to the door— 

But ſhe would not hear me further; and her ſudden breaking from me occaſioned a hurry to ſomemean liſtener; as the ſlipping of a foot from the landing-place on the ſtairs diſcovered to me. 

I had ſcarcely recovered myſelf from this attack, when up came Betty, with a, Miſs, your company is deſired below-ſtairs in your own parlour. 

By whom, Betty? 

How can I tell, Miſs?—Perhaps by your ſiſter; perhaps by your brother—I know they won't come up-ſtairs to your apartment again. 

Is Mr. Solmes gone, Betty? 

I believe he is, Miſs:—Would you have him ſent for back, ſaid the bold creature? 

Down I went: And who ſhould I be ſent for down to, but my brother and Mr. Solmes? The latter ſtanding ſneaking behind the door, that I ſaw him not, till I was mockingly led by the hand into the room by my brother. And then I ſtarted as if I had beheld a ghoſt. 

You are to ſit down, Clary. 

And what then, brother? 

Why, then, you are to put off that ſcornful look, and hear what Mr. Solmes has to ſay to you. 

Sent for down to be baited again, thought I! 

Madam, ſaid Mr. Solmes, as if in haſte to ſpeak, leſt he ſhould not have opportunity given him; and he judged right; Mr. Lovelace is a declaredmarriage-hater,and has a deſign upon your honour, if ever— 

Baſe accuſer! ſaid I, in a paſſion, ſnatching my hand from my brother, who was inſolently motioning to give it to Mr. Solmes; he has not!—he dares not! Butyouhave! if endeavouring to force a free mind, is to diſhonour it! 

O thou violent creature! ſaid my brother—But not gone yet—for I was ruſhing away. 

What mean you, Sir (ſtruggling vehemently to get away), to detain me thus againſt my will? 

You ſhall not go, violence, claſping his unbrotherly arms about me. 

Then let not Mr. Solmes ſtay.—Why hold you me thus? He ſhall not, foryour ownſake, if I can help it, ſee how barbarouſly a brother can treat a ſiſter, who deſerves not evil treatment. 

And I ſtruggled ſo vehemently to get from him, that he was forced to quit my hand; which he did with theſe words—Begone, then, Fury!—How ſtrong is will!—There is no holding her. 

And up I flew to my chamber again, and locked myſelf in, trembling, and out of breath. 

In leſs than a quarter of an hour, up came Betty. I let her in, upon her tapping, and aſking (half out of breath too) for admittance. 

The Lord have mercy upon us! ſaid ſhe.—What aconfuſion of a houſeis This!—Hurrying up and down, fanning herſelf with her handkerchief—Such angry maſters and miſtreſſes! Such an obſtinate young lady!—Such an humble lover!—Such enraged uncles!—Such—O dear! dear! What a topſy-turvy houſe is This?—And all for what, trow?—Only becauſe a young Ladymaybe happy, and willnot?—Only becauſe a young Ladywillhave a huſband, and willnothave a huſband?—What hurly-burlies are here, where all uſed to be peace and quietneſs? 

Thus ſhe ran on, talking to herſelf; while I ſat as patiently as I could (being aſſured that her errand was not deſigned to be a welcome one to me), to obſerve when her ſoliloquy would end. 

At laſt, turning to me—I muſt do as I am bid: I can't help it—Don't be angry with me, Miſs. But I muſt carry down your pen and ink: And that, this moment. 

By whoſe order? 

By your papa's and mamma's. 

How ſhall I know that? 

She offered to go to my cloſet: I ſtept in before her: Touch it, if you dare. 

Up came my couſin Dolly—Madam!—Madam! ſaid the poor weeping good-natured creature, in broken ſentences—You muſt—indeed you muſt—deliver to Betty—or to me—your pen and ink. 

Muſt I, my ſweet couſin? Then I will to you; but not to this bold body. And ſo I gave my ſtandiſh to her. 

I am ſorry, very ſorry, ſaid Miſs, to be the meſſenger: But your papa will not have you in the ſame houſe with him: He is reſolved you ſhall be carried away to-morrow, or Saturday at fartheſt. And therefore your pen and ink is taken away, that you may give no-body notice of it. 

And away went the dear girl very ſorrowfully, carrying down with her my ſtandiſh, and all its furniture, and a little parcel of pens beſide, which having been ſeen when the great ſearch was made, ſhe was bid to aſk for: As it happened, I had not diminiſhed it, having half a dozen Crow-quills, which I had hid in as many different places. It was lucky; for I doubt not they had told how many were in the parcel. 

Betty run on, telling me, that my mamma was now as much incenſed againſt me, as any-body—That my doom was fixed!—That my violent behaviour had not left one to plead for me. That Mr. Solmes bit his lip, and mumbled, and ſeemed to have more in his head, than could come out at his mouth; that was her phraſe. 

And yet ſhe alſo hinted to me, that the cruel creature took pleaſure in ſeeing me; altho' ſo much to my diſguſt.—And ſo wanted to ſee me again. Muſt he not be a ſavage, my dear? 

The wench went on—That my uncle Harlowe ſaid, That nowhegave me up.—That he pitied Mr. Solmes—Yet hoped he would not think of This to my detriment hereafter: That my uncle Antony was of opinion, That I ought to ſmart for it:And,forherpart—And then, as one of the family, ſhe gave her opinion of the ſame ſide. 

As I have no other way of hearing any thing that is ſaid, or intended, below, I bear ſometimes more patiently, than I otherwiſe ſhould do, with her impertinence. And, indeed, ſhe ſeems to be in all my brother's and ſiſter's counſels. 

Miſs Hervey came up again, and demanded an half-pint ink-bottle, which they had ſeen in my cloſet. 

I gave it her without heſitation. 

If they have no ſuſpicion of my being able to write, they will, perhaps, let me ſtay longer than otherwiſe they would. 

This, my dear, is now my ſituation. 

All my dependence, all my hopes, is in your mamma's favour. But for That, I know not what I might do: For who can tell what will come next? 

LETTER XXXIII. MiſsCLARISSA HARLOWE,To MiſsHOWE.
Wedneſday, Four o'Clock in the Afternoon.I Am juſt returned from depoſiting the letter I ſo lately finiſhed, and ſuch of Mr. Lovelace's letters as I had not ſent you. My long letter, I found remaining there.—So you'll have both together. 

I am concerned, methinks, it is not with you.—But your ſervant cannot always be at leiſure. However, I'll depoſite as faſt as I write: I muſt keep nothing by me now; and when I write, lock myſelf in, that I may not be ſurpriſed, now they think I have no pen and ink. 

I found, in the uſual place, another letter from this diligent man: And by its contents, a confirmation, that nothing paſſes in this houſe, but he knows it; and that, as ſoon as it paſſes. For this letter muſt have been written before he could have received mybillet; and depoſited, I ſuppoſe, when that was taken away; yet, he compliments me in it, upon aſſerting myſelf, as he calls it, on that occaſion, to my uncle and to Mr. Solmes. 

'He aſſures me, however, that they are more and 'more determin'd to ſubdue me. 

'He ſends me the compliments of his family; and acquaints me with their earneſt deſire to ſee me amongſt them. Moſt vehemently does he preſs for my quitting This houſe, while it is in my power to get away: And again craves leave to order his uncle's chariot-and-ſix to attend my orders at the ſtyle leading to the coppice, adjoining to the paddock. 

'Settlements to my own will, he again offers. Lord M. and both his aunts to be guaranties of his honour and juſtice. But, if I chooſe not to go to either of his aunts, nor yet to make him the happieſt of men ſo ſoon, as it is nevertheleſs his hope that I will, he urges me to withdraw to my own houſe; and to accept of my Lord M. for my guardian and protector, till my couſin Morden arrives. He can contrive, he ſays, to give me eaſy poſſeſſion of it, and will fill it with his female relations,, on the firſt invitation from me; and Mrs. Norton, or Miſs Howe, may be undoubtedly prevailed upon to be with me for a time. There can be no pretence for litigation, he ſays, when I am once in it. Nor, if I chooſe to have it ſo, will he appear to viſit me; nor preſume to mention marriage to me till all is quiet and eaſy; till every method I ſhall preſcribe for a reconciliation with my friends, is try'd; till my couſin comes; till ſuch ſettlements are drawn, as he ſhall approve of for me; and that I have unexceptionable proofs of his own good behaviour.' 

As to the diſgrace a perſon of my character may be apprehenſive of, upon quitting my father's houſe, he obſerves, too truly, I doubt,'That the treatmentI meet with, is in every one's mouth: Yet, he ſays, that the public voice is in my favour: My friends themſelves, he ſays,expectthat I will do myſelf, what he calls, this juſtice; why elſe do they confine me? He urges, that, thus treated, the independence I have a right to, will be my ſufficient excuſe, going but from their houſe to my own, if I chooſe that meaſure; or, in order to take poſſeſſion of my own, if I do not: That all the diſgrace Icanreceive, they have already given me: That his concern, and his family's concern,inmy honour, will be equal to my own, if he may be ſo happy ever to call me his: And he preſumes to aver, that no family can better ſupply the loſs of my own friends to me, than his, in whatever way I do them the honour to accept of his and their protection. 

'But he repeats, that, in all events, he will oppoſe my being carried to my uncle's; being well aſſured, that I ſhall be loſt to him for ever, if once I enter into that houſe.'He tells me,'That my brother and ſiſter, and Mr. Solmes, deſign to be there to receive me: That my father and mother will not come near me, till the ceremony is actually over: And that then they will appear, in order to try to reconcile me to my odious huſband, by urging upon me the obligations I ſhall be ſuppoſed to be under, from a double duty.' 

How, my dear, am I driven between both!—This laſt intimation is but a too probable one. All the ſteps they take, ſeem to tend to this! And, indeed, they have declared almoſt as much. 

He owns,'That he has already taken his meaſures upon this intelligence:—But that he is ſo deſirous, formy ſake[I muſtſuppoſe,he ſays, that he owesthemno forbearancefor their own], to avoid coming to extremities, that he has ſuffer'd a perſon, whom they do not ſuſpect, to acquaint them, as if unknown to himſelf, with his reſolutions, if they perſiſtin their deſign to carry me by violence to my uncle's; in hopes, that they may be induced, from fear of miſchief, tochangetheir meaſures: Altho' he runs a riſque, if he cannot be benefited by their fears, from their doubly guarding themſelves againſt him on this intimation!' 

What a dangerous enterprizer, however, is this man! 

'He begs a few lines from me, by way of anſwer to this letter, either This evening, or to-morrow morning.—If he be not ſo favour'd, he ſhall conclude, from what he knows of their fixed determination, that I ſhall be under a cloſer reſtraint than before: And he ſhall be obliged to take his meaſures according to that preſumption.' 

You will ſee by this abſtract, as well as by his letter preceding This (for both run in the ſame ſtrain); how ſtrangely forward the difficulty of my ſituation has brought him in his declarations and propoſals; and in his threatenings too: Which, but for That, I would not take from him. 

Something, however, I muſt ſpeedily reſolve upon, or it will be out of my power to help myſelf. 

Now I think of it, I will incloſe his letter (ſo might have ſpared the abſtract of it), that you may the better judge of all his propoſals, and intelligence; and leſt it ſhould fall into other hands. I cannot forget the contents, altho' I am at a loſs what anſwer to return. 

I cannot bear the thoughts of throwing myſelf upon the protection of his friends:—But I will not examine his propoſals cloſely, till I hear from you. Indeed, I have noeligiblehope, but in your mamma's goodneſs.Hersis a protection I could morereputablyfly to, than to That of any other perſon: And from hers ſhould be ready to return to my father's (for the breach then would not be irreparable, as it would be, if I fled to his family):To return,I repeat,on ſuch terms as ſhall ſecure but mynegative; not myIndependence:I do not aim at That (ſo ſhall lay your mamma under the leſs difficulty); altho' I have a right to it, if I were to inſiſt upon it:—Such a right, I mean, as my brother exerts in the eſtate, lefthim; and which no-body diſputes.—God forbid, that I ſhould ever think myſelf freed from my father'sreaſonablecontroul, whatever right my grandfather's will has given me! He, good gentleman, left me that eſtate, as a reward of my duty, and not to ſet me above it, as has been juſtly hinted to me: And this reflection makes me more fearful of not anſwering the intention of ſo valuable a bequeſt.—O that my friends knew but my heart!—Would but think of it, as they uſed to do—For once more, I ſay, If it deceive me not, it is not altered, altho' theirs are! 

Would but your mamma permit you to ſend her chariot, or chaiſe, to the bye-place where Mr. Lovelace propoſes his uncle's ſhall come (provoked, intimidated, and apprehenſive, as I am), I would not heſitate a moment what to do!—Place me any-where, as I have ſaid before!—In a cott, in a garret; anywhere—Diſguiſed as a ſervant—or let me paſs as a ſervant's ſiſter—So that I may but eſcape Mr. Solmes on one hand, and the diſgrace of refuging with the family of a man at enmity with my own, on the other; and I ſhall be in ſome meaſure happy!—Should your good mamma refuſe me, what reſuge, or whoſe, can I fly to?—Deareſt creature, adviſe your diſtreſſed friend. 

I BROKE off here—I was ſo exceſſively uneaſy, that I durſt not truſt myſelf with my own reflections: So went down to the garden, to try to calm my mind, by ſhifting the ſcene. I took but one turn upon the filbeard walk, when Betty came to me. Here Miſs, is your Papa!—Here is your uncle Antony!—Here is my young maſter—and my young miſtreſs, coming, to take a walk in the garden; and your papa ſends me to ſee where you are, for fear he ſhould meet you. 

I ſtruck into an oblique path, and got behind the yew-hedge, ſeeing my ſiſter appear; and there concealed myſelf till they were gone paſt me. 

My mamma, it ſeems, is not well. My poor mamma keeps her chamber!—Should ſhe be worſe, I ſhould have an additional unhappineſs, in apprehenſion, that my reputed undutifulneſs has touched her heart! 

You cannot imagine what my emotions were behind the yew-hedge, on ſeeing my papa ſo near me.—I was glad to look at him thro' the hedge, as he paſſed by: But I trembled in every joint, when I heard him uttertheſewords: Son James, To you, and to Bella, and to You, brother, do I wholly commit this matter.—For that I was meant, I cannot doubt. And yet, why was I ſo affected; ſince I may be ſaid to have been given up to their cruelty, for many days paſt? 

WHILE my papa remained in the garden, I ſent my dutiful compliments to my mamma, with inquiry after her health, by Shorey, whom I met accidentally upon the ſtairs; for none of the ſervants, except my gaolereſs, dare to throw themſelves in my way. I had the mortification of ſuch a return, as made me repent my meſſage, tho' not my concern for her health. Let her not inquire after the diſorders ſhe occaſions, was the harſh anſwer. I will not receive any compliments from her! 

Very, very, hard, my dear! Indeed it is very hard! 

I HAVE the pleaſure to hear my mamma is already better, however. A colicky diſorder, to which ſhe is too ſubject:—And it is hoped is gone off.—God ſend it may!—Every evil that happens in this houſe is owing to me! 

This good news was told me, with a circumſtance very unacceptable; for Betty ſaid, ſhe had orders to let me know, that my garden-walks, and poultry-viſits were ſuſpected; and that both will be prohibited, if I ſtay here till Saturday or Monday. 

Poſſibly this is ſaid by order, to make me go with leſs reluctance to my uncle's. 

My mamma bid her ſay, if I expoſtulated about theſe orders, and about my pen and ink,'That reading was more to the purpoſe, at preſent, than writeing: That by the one, I might be taught my duty; That the other, conſidering whom I was believed to write to, only ſtiffen'd my will: That my needleworks had better be purſued, than my airings; which were obſerved to be taken in all weathers.' 

So, my dear, if I do not reſolve upon ſomething ſoon, I ſhall neither be able to avoid the intended evil, nor have it in my power to correſpond with you. 

Wedneſday Night.ALL is in a hurry below-ſtairs. Betty is in and out like a ſpy. Something is working, I know not what. I am really a good deal diſorder'd in body as well as mind. Indeed I am quite heart-ſick! 

I will go down, tho' 'tis almoſt dark, on pretence of getting a little air and compoſure. Robert has my two former, I hope, before now: And I will depoſite This, with Lovelace's incloſed, if I can, for fear of another ſearch. 

I know not what I ſhall do!—All is ſo ſtrangely buſy!—Doors clapt to: Going-out of one apartment, hurryingly, as I may ſay, into another. Betty in her alarming way, ſtaring, as if of frighted importance;twice with me in half an hour; called down in haſte, by Shorey, the laſt time; leaving me with ſtill more meaning in her looks and geſtures!—Yet poſſibly nothing in all This, worthy of my apprehenſions.—Here, again, comes the creature, with her deep-drawn affected ſighs, and herO dear's! O dear's! 

MORE dark hints thrown out by this ſaucy creature. But ſhe will not explain herſelf.'Suppoſe this pretty buſineſs ends in murder, ſhe ſays. I may rue my oppoſition, as long as I live, for aught ſhe knows. Parents will not bebaffledout of their children by impudent gentlemen; nor is it fit they ſhould. It may come home to me, when I leaſt expect it.' 

Theſe are the gloomy and perplexing hints this impertinent throws out. Probably they ariſe from the information Mr. Lovelace ſays he has ſecretly permitted them to have [From his vile double-faced agent, I ſuppoſe!] of his reſolution to prevent my being carried to my uncle's. 

How juſtly, if ſo, may This exaſperate them!—How am I driven to and fro, like a feather in the wind, at the pleaſure of the raſh, the ſelfiſh, and the headſtrong! and when I am as averſe to the proceedings of the one, as I am to thoſe of the other! But being forced into a clandeſtine correſpondence, indiſcreet meaſures are fallen upon by the raſh man, before I can be conſulted: And between them, I have not an option, altho' my ruin [For is not the loſs of reputation a ruin?] may be the dreadful conſequence of the ſteps taken. What a perverſe fate is mine! 

If I am prevented depoſiting this, and the incloſed, as I intend to try to do, late as it is, I will add toit, as occaſion ſhall offer. Mean time, believe me to be 

Your ever affectionate and grateful CL. HARLOWE.Under the ſuperſcription, written with a penſil, after ſhe went down. 

'My two former not taken away!—I am ſurpriſed!—I hope you are well—I hope All is right betwixt your mamma and you.' 

LETTER XXXIV. MiſsHOWE,To MiſsCLARISSA HARLOWE.
Thurſday Morning, April 6.I Have your three letters. Never was there a creature more impatient on the moſt intereſting uncertainty than I was, to know the event of the interview between you and Solmes. 

It behoves me to account to my dear friend, in her preſent unhappy ſituation, for every thing that may have the leaſt appearance of a negligence or remiſſneſs, on my part. I ſent Robin in the morning early, in hopes of a depoſite. He loiter'd about the place till near Ten, to no purpoſe; and then came away; my mamma having given him a letter to carry to Mr. Hunt's, which he was to deliver before Three, when only, in the day-time, that gentleman is at home; and to bring her back an anſwer to it. Mr. Hunt's houſe, you know, lies wide from Harlowe-Place.—Robin but juſt ſaved his time; and return'd not till it was too late to ſend him again. I could only direct him to ſet out before day, this morning; and, if he got any letter, to ride, as for his life, to bring it to me. 

I lay by myſelf; A moſt uneaſy night I had, thro' impatience; and being diſcompoſed with it, lay longer than uſual. Juſt as I was riſen, in came Kitty, fromRobin, with your three letters. I was not a quarter dreſs'd; and only ſlipp'd on my morning ſacque; proceeding no further till (long as they are) I had read them all thro': And yet I often ſtopp'd to rave aloud (tho' by myſelf) at the deviliſh people you have to deal with. 

How my heart riſes at them all! How poorly did they deſign to trick you into an encouragement of Solmes, from the interview to which they had extorted your conſent!—I am very, very angry at your aunt Hervey! To give up her own judgment ſo tamely!—And not content with that, to become ſuch anactiveinſtrument in their hands.—But it is ſo like the world!—So like my mamma too!—Next to her own child, there is not any-body living ſhe values ſo much as ſhe does you:—Yet, it is—Why ſhould we embroil ourſelves, Nancy, with other peoples affairs? 

Other people!—How I hate the poor words, where friendſhip is concern'd, and where the protection to be given may be of ſo much conſequence to a friend, and of ſo little detriment to one's ſelf! 

I am delighted with your ſpirit, however. I expected it not from you. Nor did They, I am ſure. Nor wouldyou,perhaps, have exerted it, if Lovelace's intelligence of Solmes's nurſery-offices had not ſet you up. I wonder not that the wretch is ſaid to love you the better for it. What an honour to have ſuch a wife? And he can be even with you when you are ſo. He muſt indeed be a ſavage, as you ſay.—Yet is he leſs to blame for his perſeverance, than thoſe of your own family, whom moſt you reverence. 

It is well, as I have often ſaid, that I have not ſuch provocations and trials; I ſhould, perhaps, long ago, have taken your couſin Dolly's advice—Yet dare I not to touch that key.—I ſhall always love the good girl, for her tenderneſs to you. 

I know not what to ſay to Lovelace; nor what to think of his promiſes, nor of his propoſals to you.'Tis certain that you are highly eſteem'd by all his family. The Ladies are perſons of unblemiſhd honour. My Lord M. is alſo, as Men and Peers go, a man of honour. I could tell what to adviſe any other perſon in the world to do but you. So much expected from you! Such a ſhining light!—Your quitting your father's houſe, and throwing yourſelf into the protection of a family, however honourable, that has a Man in it, whoſe perſon, parts, declarations, and pretenſions, will be thought to have engag'd your warmeſt eſteem!—Methinks I am rather for adviſing, that you ſhould get privately to London; and not to let either him, or any-body elſe but me, know where you are, till your couſin Morden comes. 

As to going to your uncle's, that you muſt not do, if you can help it. Nor muſt you have Solmes, that's certain: Not only becauſe of his unworthineſs in every reſpect, but becauſe of the averſion you have ſo openly avow'd to him; which every-body knows and talks of; as they do of your approbation of the other. For your reputation-ſake, therefore, as well as to prevent miſchief, you muſt either live ſingle, or have Lovelace. 

If you think of going to London, let me know; and I hope you will havetimeto allow me a farther concert, as to the manner of your getting away, and thither, and how to procure proper lodgings for you. 

To obtain thistime,you muſt palliate a little, and come into ſome ſeeming compromiſe, if you cannot do otherwiſe. Driven as you are driven, it will be ſtrange if you are not obliged to part with a few of your admirable punctilioes. 

You will obſerve from what I have written, that I have not ſucceeded with my mamma. 

I am extremely mortify'd and diſappointed. We have had very ſtrong debates upon it. But, beſides the narrow argument ofembroiling ourſelves with other peoples affairs,as above-mentioned, ſhe will have it,that it is your duty to comply. She ſays, ſhe wasalwaysof opinion, that daughtersſhould,and govern'd herſelf by it; for that my papa was, at firſt, more her father's choice than her own. 

This is what ſhe argues in behalf of her favourite Hickman, as well as for Solmes in your caſe. 

I muſt not doubt, but my mamma always govern'd herſelf by this principle, becauſe ſheſaysſhe did. I have likewiſe another reaſon to believe it; which you ſhall have, tho' it may not become me to give it:—That they did not live ſo very happily together, as one would hope people might, who married preferring each other to the reſt of the world. 

Somebody ſhall fare never the better for this double-meant policy of my mamma, I will aſſure him. Such a retroſpection in her arguments to him, and to his addreſs, it is but fit, thatheſhould ſuffer formymortification in a point I had ſo much ſet my heart upon. 

Think, my dear, if in any way I can ſerve you. If you allow of it, I proteſt I will go off privately with you, and we will live and die together. Think of it. Improve upon my hint, and command me. 

A little interruption. What is breakfaſt to the ſubject I am upon! 

LONDON, I am told, is the beſt hiding-place in the world. I have written nothing but what I will ſtand to at the word of command. Women love to engage in knight-errantry, now-and-then, as well as to encourage it in the men. But in your caſe, what I propoſe, will have nothing in it of what can be deemedthat.It will enable me to perform what is no more than a duty in ſerving and comforting a dear and worthy friend, labouring under undeſerved oppreſſion: And you willennoble,as I may ſay, yourAnna Howe, if you will allow her to be your companion in affliction. 

I'll engage, my dear, we ſhall not be in town together one month, before we ſurmount all difficulties; and This without being beholden to any men-fellows for their protection. 

I muſt repeat what I have often ſaid, That the authors of your perſecutions would not have preſumed to ſet on foot their ſelfiſh ſchemes againſt you, had they not depended upon the gentleneſs of your ſpirit: Tho' now, having gone ſo far, and having engagedOldAUTHORITY in it [Chide me, if you will!] neitherhenortheyknow how to recede. 

When they find you out of their reach, and know that I am with you, you'll ſee how they'll pull in their odious horns. 

I think, however, that you ſhould have written to your couſin Morden, the moment they had begun to treat you diſgracefully. 

I ſhall be impatient to hear, whether they will attempt to carry you to your uncle's. I remember, that Lord M.'s diſmiſſed bailiff reported of Lovelace, that he had ſix or ſeven companions as bad as himſelf; and that the country was always glad when they left it. Hehasſuch a knot of them now, I hear, about him. And, depend upon it, he will not ſuffer them quietly to carry you to your uncle's: And whoſe muſt you be, if he ſucceeds in taking you from them? 

I tremble for you, but upon ſuppoſing what may be the conſequences of a conflict upon this occaſion. To be ſure, he owes ſome of them vengeance. This gives me a double concern, that my mamma ſhould refuſe her conſent to the protection I had propoſed, and ſet my heart upon procuring, for you. 

My mamma will not breakfaſt without me. A quarrel has its conveniencies ſometimes: Yet too much love, I think, is as bad as too little. 

WE have juſt now had another pull. Upon my word, ſhe isexceſſively—What ſhall I ſay?—unperſuadeable—I muſt let her off with that ſoft word. 

What old Greek was it, that ſaid,Hegovern'd Athens; hiswife,him; and hisſon,her? 

It was not my mamma's fault [I am writing toyou,you know], that ſhe did not govern mypapa.But I am but adaughter!—Yet I thought I was not quite ſo powerleſs, when I was ſet upon carrying a point, as I find myſelf to be. 

Adieu, my dear!—Happier times muſt come!—And that quickly too.—The ſtrings cannot long continue thus overſtrained. They muſt break, or be relaxed. In either way, the Certainty muſt be preferable to the Suſpenſe. 

One word more. 

I think in my conſcience you muſt take one of theſe two alternatives: 1. To conſent to let us go to London together privately: In which caſe, I will procure a vehicle, and meet you at your appointment at the ſtile Lovelace propoſes to bring his uncle's chariot to. Or, 2dly, To put yourſelf into the protection of Lord M. and the Ladies of his family. 

You have another, indeed; and that is, if you are abſolutely reſolved againſt Solmes, to meet and marry Lovelace directly. 

Whichſoever of theſe you make choice of, you'll have This plea, both to yourſelf, and to the world, that you are concluded by the ſame uniform principle that has govern'd your whole conduct, ever ſince the contention between Lovelace and your brother has been on foot: That is to ſay, that you have choſen a leſſer evil, in hope to prevent a greater. 

Adieu! and Heaven direct for the beſt my beloved creature, prays 

Her ANNA HOWE.LETTER XXXV. MiſsCLARISSA HARLOWE,To MiſsHOWE.
Thurſday, April 6.I Thank you, my deareſt friend, for the kind pains you have taken in accounting ſo affectionately for my papers not being taken away yeſterday; and for the kind protection you would have procured for me, if you could. 

This kind protection was what I wiſhed for: But my wiſhes, raiſed at firſt by your love, were rather govern'd by my deſpair of other refuge (having before caſt about, and not being able to determine, what Ioughtto do, and what Icoulddo, in a ſituation ſo unhappy) than by a reaſonable hope: For why, indeed, ſhould any-body embroil themſelves for another, when they can avoid it? 

All my conſolation is, as I have frequently ſaid, that I have not, by my own inadvertence or folly, brought myſelf into this ſad ſituation. If Ihad,I ſhould not have dared to look up to any-body with the expectation of protection or aſſiſtance, nor to you, for excuſe of the trouble I give you. But, nevertheleſs, we ſhould not be angry at a perſon's not doing that for ourſelves, or for our friend, which ſhe thinks ſhe oughtnotto do; and which ſhe has it in her option todo,or tolet alone.Much leſs have you a right to be diſpleaſed with ſo prudent a mother, for not engaging herſelf ſo warmly in my favour, as you wiſh'd ſhe would. If my own aunt can give me up, and that againſt her judgment, as I may preſume to ſay; and if my father, and mother, and uncles, who once loved me ſo well, can join ſo ſtrenuouſly againſt me; canIexpect, or oughtyou,the protection of your mamma, inoppoſitionto them? 

Indeed, my deareſt love [Permit me to beveryſerious],I am afraid I am ſingled out, either for my own faults, or for the faults of my family, or for the faults of both, to be a very unhappy creature!—ſignallyunhappy! For ſee you not how irreſiſtibly the waves of affliction come tumbling down upon me? 

We have been till within theſe few weeks, everyone of us, too happy. No croſſes, no vexations, but what we gave ourſelves from thepamperdneſs,as I may call it, of our own wills. Surrounded by our heaps and ſtores, hoarded up as faſt as acquired, we have ſeemed to think ourſelves out of the reach of the bolts of adverſe fate. I was the pride of all my friends, proudmyſelfoftheirpride, and glorying in my ſtanding, who knows what the juſtice of Heaven may inflict, in order to convince us, that we are not out of the reach of misfortune; and to reduce us to a better reliance, than That we have hitherto preſumptuouſly made? 

I ſhould have been very little the better for theconverſation-viſitswhich the good Dr. Lewin uſed to honour me with, and for the principleswrought,as I may ſay, into my earlieſt mind by my pious Mrs. Norton, founded on her reverend father's experience, as well as on her own, if I could not thus retroſpect and argue, in ſuch a ſtrange ſituation as we are in.Strange,I may well call it; for don't you ſee, my dear, that we ſeem all to beimpelled,as it were, by a perverſe fate, which none of us are able to reſiſt?—And yet all ariſing (with a ſtrong appearance of ſelf-puniſhment), from ourſelves?—Do not my parents ſee the hopeful children, from whom they expected a perpetuity of worldly happineſs to their branching family, now grown up to anſwer thetillnow diſtant hope, ſetting their angry faces againſt each other, pulling up by the roots, as I may ſay, that hope, which was ready to be carried into a probable certainty? 

Your partial love will be ready to acquit me of capital and intentional faults:—But oh, my dear! mycalamities have humbled me enough, to make me turn my gaudy eye inward; to make me look into myſelf!—And what have I diſcover'd there?—Why, my dear friend, moreſecretpride and vanity, than I could have thought had lain in my unexamined heart. 

IfIam to be ſingled out to be thepuniſherof myſelf, and family, who ſo lately was theprideof it, pray for me, my dear, that I may not be left wholly to myſelf; and that I may be enabled to ſupport my character, ſo as to bejuſtlyacquitted of wilful and premeditated faults. The will of Providence be reſigned to in the reſt: Asthatleads, let me patiently, and unrepiningly, follow!—I ſhall not live always!—May but mycloſingſcene be happy!— 

But I will not oppreſs you, my deareſt friend, with further reflections of this ſort. I will take them all into myſelf. Surely I have a mind, that has room for them. My afflictions are too ſharp to laſt long. The criſis is at hand. Happier times you bid me hope for. Iwillhope! 

BUT yet, I cannot but be impatient at times, to find myſelf thus driven, and my character ſo depreciated and ſunk, that were all thefutureto be happy, I ſhould be aſham'd to ſhew my face in public, or to look up. And all by the inſtigation of a ſelfiſh brother, and envious ſiſter!— 

But let me ſtop: Let me reflect!—Are not theſe ſuggeſtions the ſuggeſtions of theſecretpride I have been cenſuring? Then,alreadyſo impatient! But this moment ſo reſigned! ſo much better diſpoſed for reflection!—Yet 'tis hard, 'tis very hard, to ſubdue an embitter'd ſpirit!—In the inſtant of its trial too!—O my cruel brother!—But now it riſes again!—I will lay down a pen I am ſo little able to govern.—And I will try to ſubdue an impatience, which (if my afflictions are ſent me for corrective ends) may otherwiſe lead me into ſtill more puniſhable errors!— 

I WILL return to a ſubject, which I cannot fly from for ten minutes together—called upon eſpecially as I am, by your three alternatives ſtated in the concluſion of your laſt. 

As to the firſt; to wit,Your advice for me to escape to London—Let me tell you, that that other hint or propoſal which accompanies it, perfectly frightens me—Surely, my dear [happy as you are, and indulgently treated as your mamma treats you], you cannot mean what you propoſe! What a wretch muſt I be, if I could, foronemoment only, lend an ear to ſuch propoſal as This!—I,to be the occaſion of making ſuch a mother's (perhapsſhorten'd) life unhappy to the laſt hour of it!—Ennobleyou, my dear creature! How muſt ſuch an enterprize [the raſhneſspublic,the motives, were they excuſable,private] debaſe you!—But I will not dwell upon the ſubject.—For yourownſake I will not. 

As to your ſecond alternative,To put myſelf into the protection of Lord M. and of the Ladies of that family,I own to you (as I believe I have owned before), that altho' to do This would be the ſame thing in the eye of the world, as putting myſelf into Mr. Lovelace's protection, yet, I think, I would do it, rather than be Mr. Solmes's wife, if there were evidently no other way to avoid being ſo. 

Mr. Lovelace, you have ſeen, propoſes to contrive a way to put me into poſſeſſion of my own houſe; and he tells me, that he will ſoon fill it with the Ladies of his family, as my viſitors;—upon my invitation, however, to them.—A very inconſiderate propoſal I think it to be, and upon which I cannot explain myſelf to him. What an exertion of independency does it chalk out for me! How, were I to attend tohim(and not to the natural conſequences which the following of his advice would lead me to) might I be drawn bygentlewords, into the perpetration of the moſtviolentacts!—For how could I gain poſſeſſion, but either by legal litigation, which, were Iinclin'dto have recourſe to it [as I never can be], muſt take up time; or by forcibly turning out the perſons whom my papa has placed there, to look after the gardens, the houſe, and the furniture—perſons intirely attached to himſelf, and who, as I know, have been lately inſtructed by my brother? 

Your third alternative,To meet and marry Lovelace directly: a man with whoſe morals I am far from being ſatisfy'd—A ſtep, that could not be taken with the leaſt hope of ever obtaining pardon from, or reconciliation with, any of my friends;—and againſt which a thouſand objections riſe in my mind—That is not to be thought of. 

What appears to me, upon the fulleſt deliberation, the moſt eligible, if Imuſtbe thus driven, is the eſcaping to London.—But I would forfeit all my hopes of happineſs in this life, rather than you ſhould go off with me, as you raſhly propoſe.—If I could get ſafely thither, and be private, methinks I might remain abſolutely independent of Mr. Lovelace, and at liberty, either to make propoſals to my friends, or, ſhould they renounce me (and I had no other or better way) to make terms with him; ſuppoſing my couſin Morden, on his arrival, were to join with them. But they would, perhaps,thenindulge me in my choice of a ſingle life, on giving him up: The renewing to them this offer, when I was at my own liberty, would at leaſt convince them, that I was in earneſt when I made it firſt: And, upon my word, Iwouldſtand to it, dear as you ſeem to think, when you are diſpoſed to railly me, it would coſt me,toſtand to it. 

If, my dear, you can procure a conveyance for usboth,you can, perhaps, procure one for meſingly; But can it be done without embroilingyourſelfwith your mamma, orherwith our family?—Be it coach, chariot, chaiſe, waggon, or horſe, I matter not,provided You appear not in it. Only, in caſe it be one of the two latter, I believe I muſt deſire you to get me an ordinary gown and coat, or habit, of ſome ſervant; having no concert with any of our own: The more ordinary the better. They may be thruſt into the wood-houſe; where I can put them on; and then ſlide down from the bank, that ſeparates the wood-yard from the green lane. 

But, alas! my dear, this, eventhisalternative, is not without difficulties, which ſeem, to a ſpirit ſo little enterprizing as mine, in a manner inſuperable. Theſe are my reflections upon it: 

I am afraid, in the firſt place, that I ſhall not have time for the requiſite preparations to an eſcape. 

Should I be either detected in thoſe preparations, or purſued and overtaken in my flight, and ſo brought back, then would they think themſelves doubly warranted to compel me to have their Solmes: And, conſcious, perhaps, of an intended fault, I ſhould be leſs able to contend with them. 

But were I even to get ſafely to London, I know no-body there, but by name; and thoſe the tradesmen to our family; who, no doubt, would be the firſt wrote to, and engag'd, to find me out. And ſhould Mr. Lovelace diſcover where I was, and he and my brother meet, what miſchiefs might enſue between them, whether I were willing, or not, to return to Harlowe-Place? 

But ſuppoſing I could remain there concealed, what might not my youth, my ſex, an unacquaintedneſs with the ways of that great, wicked town, expoſe me to?—I ſhould hardly dare to go to church, for fear of being diſcover'd. People would wonder how I lived. Who knows but I might paſs for a kept miſtreſs; and that, altho' no-body came to me, yet, that every-time I went out, it might be imagined to be in purſuance of ſome aſſignation? 

You, my dear, who alone would know where todirect to me, would be watched in all your ſteps, and in all your meſſages; and your mamma, at preſent not highly pleaſed with our correſpondence, would then have reaſon to bemorediſpleaſed; and might not differences follow between you, that would make me very unhappy, were I to know it? And this the more likely, as you take it ſo unaccountably [and give me leave to ſay, ſo ungenerouſly] into your head, to revenge yourſelf upon the innocent Mr. Hickman for all the diſpleaſure your mamma gives you? 

Were Lovelace to find out where I was; that would be the ſame thing, in the eye of the world, as if I had actually gone off with him: For (among ſtrangers, as I ſhould be) he would not be prevailed upon to forbear viſiting me: And his unhappy character [a fooliſh man!] is no credit to any young creature, deſirous of concealment. Indeed, the world, let me eſcape whither, and to whomſoever, would concludehimto be at the bottom, and the contriver, of it. 

Theſe are the difficulties which ariſe to me on revolving this ſcheme; which, ſituated as I am, might appear ſurmountable to a more enterpriſing ſpirit. If you, my dear, think them ſurmountable, in any one of the caſes put [and to be ſure I can take no courſe, but what muſt haveſomedifficulty in it], be pleaſed to let me know your free and full thoughts upon it. 

Hadyou,my dear friend, been married, then ſhould I have had no doubt, but you and Mr. Hickman would have afforded an aſylum to a poor creature, more than half loſt, in her own apprehenſion, for want of one kind, protecting friend! 

You ſay, I ſhould have written to my couſin Morden the moment I was treated diſgracefully. But could I have believed that my friends would not have ſoften'd by degrees, when they ſaw my antipathy to their Solmes? 

I had thoughts indeed ſeveral times of writing tohim. But by the time an anſwer could have come, I imagined all would have been over, as if it had never been:—So from day to day, from week to week, I hoped on: And, after all, I might as reaſonably fear (as I have heretofore ſaid), that my couſin would be brought to ſide againſt me, as that ſome of thoſe I have named, would. 

And then to appeal to acouſin[I muſt have written withwarmth,to engage him], againſt afather; This was not a deſirable thing to ſet about! Then I had not, you know, one ſoul of my ſide; my mamma herſelf againſt me: To be ſure he would have ſuſpended his judgment till he could have arrived.—He might not have been in haſte to come, hoping the malady would cure itſelf: Buthadhe written, his letters probably would have run in the qualifying ſtyle; to perſuademeto ſubmit, orthemonly to relax: Had his letters been more onmyſide than ontheirs,they would not have regarded them: Nor perhapshimſelf,had he come, and been an advocate for me: For you ſee how ſtrangely determined they are; how they have over-awed, or got in, every-body; ſo that no one dare open their lips in my behalf: And you have heard, that my brother puſhes his meaſures with the more violence, that all may be over with me before my couſin's expected arrival. 

But you tell me, That, in order to gain time, I muſtpalliate; that I muſt ſeem to compromiſe with my friends.—But howpalliate?howſeemto compromiſe?—You would not have me endeavour to make them believe, that I will conſent to what I never intend to conſent to!—You would not have me try to gain time, with a view todeceive! 

Todo evil, that good may come of it,is forbidden. And ſhall I do evil, yet know not, whether good may come of it, or not? 

Forbid it, Heaven! that Clariſſa Harlowe ſhould have it in her thought toſerve,or even toſave,herſelf,at the expence of her ſincerity, and by aſtudieddeceit! 

And is there, after all, no way to eſcape one great evil, but by plunging myſelf into another?—What an ill-fated creature am I?—Pray for me, my deareſt Nancy!—My mind is at preſent ſo much diſturbed, that I hardly can for myſelf!— 

LETTER XXXVI. MiſsCLARISSA HARLOWE,To MiſsHOWE.
Thurſday Night.THE alarming hurry I mentioned under my date of laſt night, and Betty's ſaucy, dark hints, come out to be owing to what I gueſs'd they were; that is to ſay, to the private intimation Mr. Lovelace contrived our family ſhould have of his inſolent reſolution [inſolentI muſt call it] to prevent my being carried to my uncle's. 

I ſaw at the time, that it was aswrong,with reſpect to anſwering his own view, as it wasinſolent:For could he think, as Betty (I ſuppoſe from her betters) juſtly obſerved, That parents would be inſulted out of their right to the diſpoſal of their own child, by a violent man, whom they hate; and who could have no pretenſion to diſpute that right with them, unleſs what he had fromher,who had none over herſelf? And how muſt this inſolence of his exaſperate them againſt me, emblazon'd, as my brother is able to emblazon it? 

The raſh man has indeed ſo far gained his point, as to intimidate them from attempting to carry me away: But he has put them upon a ſurer and a more deſperate meaſure: And this has put me alſo upon oneasdeſperate; the conſequence of which, altho' he could not foreſee it, may, perhaps, too well anſwerhis great end, little as he deſerves to have it anſwer'd. 

In ſhort, I have done, as far as I know, the raſheſt thing that ever I did in my life! 

But let me give you the motive, and then the action will follow of courſe. 

About ſix o' clock this evening, my aunt [who ſtays here all night; on my account, no doubt] came up, and tapp'd at my door; for I was writing, and had lock'd myſelf in. I open'd it; and ſhe entering, thus delivered herſelf: 

I come once more to viſit you, my dear; but ſorely againſt my will; becauſe it is to impart to you matters of the utmoſt concern to You, and to the whole family. 

What, Madam, is now to be done with me? ſaid I; wholly attentive. 

You will not be hurried away to your uncle's, child; let that comfort you.—They ſee your averſion to go.—You will not be obliged to go to your uncle Antony's. 

How you revive me, Madam! [I little thought what was to follow this ſuppoſed condeſcenſion] This is a cordial to my heart! 

And then I ran over with bleſſings for this good news [and ſhe permitted me ſo to do, by her ſilence]; congratulating myſelf, that Ithoughtmy papa could not reſolve to carry things to the laſt extremity— 

Hold, niece, ſaid ſhe, at laſt.—You muſt not give yourſelf too much joy upon the occaſion neither.—Don't be ſurpriſed, my dear.—Why look you upon me, child, with ſo affecting an earneſtneſs!—But you muſt be Mrs. Solmes, for all that. 

I was dumb. 

She then told me, that they had had undoubted information, that a certain deſperateruffian[I muſt excuſe her that word, ſhe ſaid] had prepared armedmen to way-lay my brother and uncles, and ſeize me, and carry me off.—Surely, ſhe ſaid, I was not conſenting to a violence, that might be followed by murder, on one ſide, or the other; perhaps on both.— 

I was ſtill ſilent. 

That therefore my father (ſtill more exaſperated than before) had changed his reſolution as to my going to my uncle's; and was determined next Tueſday to ſet out thitherhimſelfwith my mamma; and that (for it was to no purpoſe to conceal a reſolution ſo ſoon to be put in execution)—I muſt not diſpute it any longer—on Wedneſday I muſt give my hand—as they would have me. 

She proceeded, That orders were already given for a licence: That the ceremony was to be performed in my own chamber, in preſence of all my friends, except of my father and mother; who would not return, nor ſee me, till all was over, and till they had a good account of my behaviour. 

The very intelligence, my dear!—the very intelligence This, which Lovelace gave me! 

I was ſtill dumb—Only ſighing, as if my heart would break. 

She went on comforting me, as ſhe thought. She laid before me the merit of obedience; and told me, that if it were my deſire that my Mrs. Norton ſhould be preſent at the ceremony, it would be complied with: That the pleaſure I ſhould receive from reconciling all my friends to me, and in their congratulations upon it, muſt needs over-balance, with ſuch a one as me, the difference of perſons, however preferable I might think the one man to the other: That Love was a fleeting thing, little better than a name, where morality and virtue did not diſtinguiſh the object of it: That a choice made by its dictates was ſeldom happy; at leaſt notdurablyſo: Nor was it to be wonder'd at, when it naturally exalted the object above its merits, and made the lover blind tofaults, that were viſible to every-body elſe: So that when a nearer intimacy ſtript it of its imaginary perfections, it left frequently both ſides ſurprized, that they could be thus cheated; and that then the Indifference became ſtronger than the Love ever was. That a woman gave a man great advantages, and inſpired him with great vanity, when ſhe avowed her love for him, and preference of him, and was generally requited with inſolence and contempt: Whereas the confeſſedly-obliged man, it was probable, would be all reverence and gratitude; and I cannot tell what. 

You, my dear, ſaid ſhe, believe you ſhall be unhappy, if you have Mr. Solmes: Your parents think the contrary; and that you will be undoubtedly ſo, were you to have Mr. Lovelace, whoſe morals are unqueſtionably bad:—Suppoſe it were your ſad lot to be unhappy with either, let me beſeech you to conſider, what great conſolation you will have on one hand, if you purſue your parents advice, that you did ſo; what mortification on the other, that, by following your own, you have no-body to blame but yourſelf. 

This, you remember, my dear, was an argument inforced upon me by Mrs. Norton. 

Theſe and other obſervations which ſhe made, were worthy of my aunt Hervey's good ſenſe and experience, and, applied to almoſt any young creature, who ſtood in oppoſition to her parents will, but one who had offered to make the ſacrifices I have offered to make, ought to have had their due weight. But altho' it was eaſy to anſwer ſome of them in my own particular caſe; yet, having over and over, to my mamma,beforemy confinement, and to my brother and ſiſter, and even to my aunt Hervey,ſince,ſaid what I muſt now have repeated, I was ſo much mortified and afflicted at the cruel tidings ſhe brought me, that, however attentive I was to what ſhe ſaid, I had neither power nor will to anſwer one word; and,had ſhe not ſtopp'd of herſelf, ſhe might have gone on an hour longer, without interruption from me. 

Obſerving this, and that I only ſat weeping, my handkerchief covering my face, and my boſom heaving ready to burſt; What! no anſwer, my dear?—Why ſo muchſilentgrief? You knowIalways loved you. You know, thatIhave no intereſt in this affair. You would not permit Mr. Solmes to acquaint you with ſome things which would have ſet your heart againſt Mr. Lovelace. Shall I tell you ſome of the matters charged againſt him? Shall I, my dear? 

Still I anſwered only by my tears and ſighs. 

Well, child, you ſhall be told theſe things afterwards, when you will be in a better ſtate of mind to hear them, and to rejoice in the eſcape you will have had. It will be ſome excuſe, then, for you to plead for your behaviour to Mr. Solmes before marriage, that you could not have believed Mr. Lovelace had been ſo very vile a man. 

My heart flutter'd with impatience and anger at being ſo plainly talked to as the wife of this man; but yet I then choſe to be ſilent. If I had ſpoke, it would have been with vehemence. 

Strange, my dear, ſuch ſilence!—Your concern is infinitely more on this ſide the day, than it will be on the other.—But let me aſk you, and do not be diſpleaſed, Will you chooſe to ſee what generous ſtipulations for you there are in the ſettlements?—You have knowlege beyond your years—Give the writings a peruſal: Do, my dear.—They are ingroſſed, and ready for ſigning, and have been for ſome time.—Excuſe me, my love,—I mean not to diſturb you:—Your papa would oblige me to bring them up, and to leave them with you. He commands you to read them.—Butto read them, niece—ſince they are ingroſſed, and were, before you made them abſolutely hopeleſs. 

And then, to my great terror, out ſhe drew ſome parchments from her handkerchief, which ſhe had kept(unobſerved by me) under her apron, and, riſing, put them in the oppoſite window. Had ſhe produced a ſerpent, I could not have been more frighted. 

Oh! my deareſt aunt, turning away my face, and holding out my hands: Hide from my eyes thoſe horrid parchments!—Let me conjure you to tell me! By all the tenderneſs of near relation-ſhip, and upon your honour, and by your love for me, ſay, Are they abſolutely reſolved, that, come what will, I muſt be That man's? 

My dear, you muſt have Mr. Solmes: Indeed you muſt. 

Indeed I never will! This, as I have ſaid over and over, is not originally my father's will.—Indeed I never will!—And that is All I will ſay! 

It is your father's willnow,reply'd my aunt: And conſidering how all the family is threatened by Mr. Lovelace, and the reſolution he has certainly taken to force you out of their hands; I cannot but ſay they are in the right, not to be bullied out of their child. 

Well, Madam, then nothing remains for me to ſay. I am made deſperate. I care not what becomes of me! 

Your piety, and your prudence, my dear, and Mr. Lovelace's immoral character, together with his dareing inſults, and threatenings, which ought to incenſeyou,as much as any-body, are every one's dependence. We are ſure the time will come, when you'll think very differently of the ſteps your friends take to diſappoint a man who has made himſelf ſo juſtly obnoxious to them all. 

She withdrew; leaving me full of grief and indignation:—And as much out of humour with Mr. Lovelace as with any-body; who, by his conceited contrivances, has made things worſe for me than before; depriving me of the hopes I had of gaining time to receive your advice, and private aſſiſtance to get to town; and leaving me no other choice, in allappearance, than either to throw myſelf upon his family, or to be made miſerable for ever with Mr. Solmes. But I was ſtill reſolved to avoid both theſe evils, if poſſible. 

I ſounded Betty in the firſt place (whom my aunt ſent up, not thinking it proper, as Betty told me, that I ſhould be left by myſelf, and who, I found, knew their deſigns) whether it were not probable that they would forbear, at my earneſt entreaty, to puſh matters to the threatened extremity. 

But ſhe confirmed all my aunt ſaid; rejoicing, (as ſhe ſaid they All did) that the wretch had given them ſo good a pretence to ſave me from him now, and for ever. 

She run on about equipages beſpoke; talked of my brother's and ſiſter's exultations, that now the whole family would ſoon be reconciled to each other: Of the ſervants joy upon it: Of the expected licence: Of a viſit to be paid me by Dr. Lewin, or another Clergyman, whom they named not toher; which was to crown the work: And of other preparations, ſo particular, as made me dread that they deſigned to ſurprize me into a ſtill nearer day than next Wedneſday. 

Theſe things made me exceſſively uneaſy. I knew not what to reſolve upon. 

At one time, thought I, what have I to do, but to throw myſelf at once into the protection of Lady Betty Lawrance? But then, in reſentment of hisfinecontrivances, which had ſo abominably diſconcerted me, I ſoon reſolved to the contrary. And at laſt concluded to aſk the favour of another half-hour's converſation with my aunt. 

I ſent Betty to her with my requeſt. 

She came. 

I put it to her, in the moſt earneſt manner, to tell me, whether I might not obtain the favour of a fortnight's reſpite? 

She aſſured me, It would not be granted. 

Would a week? Surely a week would? 

She believ'd a week might, if I would promiſe two things: The firſt, upon my honour, not to write a line out of the houſe, in that week: For it was ſtill ſuſpected, ſhe ſaid, that I found means to write toſome-body.And, ſecondly, to marry Mr. Solmes, at the expiration of it. 

Impoſſible! Impoſſible! I ſaid with paſſion.—What! might I not be obliged with one week, without ſuch a horrid condition at the laſt? 

She would go down, ſhe ſaid, that ſhe might not ſeem of her own head, to put upon me what I thought a hardſhip ſo great. 

She went down. And came up again. 

Did I want, was the anſwer, to give the vileſt of men opportunity to put his murderous ſchemes in execution?—It was time for them to put an end to my obſtinacy (they were tired out with me) and to his hopes, at once. And an endſhouldbe put on Tueſday or Wedneſday next, at furtheſt; unleſs I would give my honour to comply with the condition upon which my aunt had beenſo goodas to allow me a longer time. 

I even ſtamp'd with impatience!—I called upon her to witneſs, that I was guiltleſs of the conſequence of this compulſion; This barbarous compulſion, I called it; let that conſequence be what it would. 

My aunt chid me, in an higher ſtrain than ever ſhe did before. 

While I, in a half frenzy, inſiſted upon ſeeing my Papa: Such uſage, I ſaid, ſet me above fear. I would rejoice to owe my death to him, as I did my life. 

She own'd, that ſhe fear'd for my head. 

I did go down half way of the ſtairs, reſolved to throw myſelf at his feet, where-ever he was.—Myaunt was frighted.—Indeed I was quite frenzical for a few minutes.—But hearing my brother's voice, as talking to ſomebody, in my ſiſter's apartment juſt by, I ſtopped; and heard the barbarous deſigner ſay, ſpeaking to my ſiſter, This works charmingly, my dear ſiſter! 

It does! It does! ſaid ſhe, in an exulting accent. 

Let us keep it up, ſaid my brother.—The villain is caught in his own trap!—Now ſhe muſt be what we'd have her be. 

Do You keep my father to it; I'll take care of my mamma, ſaid Bella. 

Never fear, ſaid he!—And a laugh of congratulation to each other, and deriſion of me, (as I made it out) quite turned my frenzical humour into a vindictive one. 

My aunt, juſt then coming down to me, and takeing my hand, led me up; and try'd to ſooth me. 

My raving was turned into ſullenneſs. 

She preached patience and obedience to me. 

I was ſilent. 

At laſt ſhe deſired me to aſſure her, that I would offer no violence to myſelf. 

God, I ſaid, had given me more grace I hoped, than to be guilty of ſo horrid a raſhneſs. I was His creature, and notmy own. 

She then took leave of me; and I inſiſted upon her taking down with her the odious parchments. 

Seeing me in ſo ill an humour, and very earneſt that ſhe ſhould take them with her, ſhe did; but ſaid, That my papa ſhould not know that ſhe did: And hoped I would better conſider of the matter, and be calmer next time they were offer'd to my peruſal. 

I revolved, after ſhe was gone, all that my brother and ſiſter had ſaid: I dwelt upon their triumphings over me: And found riſe in my mind a rancour, that I think I may ſay was new to me; and which I couldnot withſtand.—And putting every thing together, dreading the near day, what could I do?—Am I, in any manner excuſable for what Ididdo?—If I am condemned by the world, who know not my provocations, may I be acquitted by you?—Ifnot,I am unhappy indeed.—For This I did. 

Having ſhook off Betty as ſoon as I could, I wrote to Mr. Lovelace, to let him know,'That all that was threatened at my uncle Antony's, was intended to be executedhere.That I had come to a reſolution to throw myſelf upon the protection of either of his two aunts, who would afford it me: In ſhort, that by endeavouring to obtain leave, on Monday, to dine in the ivy-ſummer-houſe, I would, if poſſible, meet him without the garden-door, at two, three, four, or five o'Clock on Monday afternoon, as I ſhould be able. That in the mean time he ſhould acquaint me, whether I might hope for either of thoſe Ladies protection:—And if ſo, I abſolutely inſiſted, that he ſhould leave me with either, and go to London himſelf, or remain at his uncle's; nor offer to viſit me, till I were ſatisfied, that nothing could be done with my friends in an amicable way; and that I could not obtain poſſeſſion of my own eſtate, and leave to live upon it: And particularly, that he ſhould not hint marriage to me, till I conſented to hear him upon that ſubject.—I added, that if he could prevail upon one of the Miſſes Montague to favour me with her company on the road, it would make me abundantly eaſier in an enterprize which I could not think of (altho' ſo driven) without the utmoſt concern; and which would throw ſuch a flur upon my reputation in the eye of the world, as, perhaps, I ſhould never be able to wipe off.' 

This was the purport of what I wrote; and down into the garden I ſlid with it in the dark, which at another time I ſhould not have had the courage todo, and depoſited it, and came up again, unknown to any-body 

My mind ſo dreadfully miſgave me when I returned, that to divert, in ſome meaſure, my increaſing uneaſineſs, I had recourſe to my private pen; and in a very ſhort time ran this length. 

And now, that I am come to this part, my uneaſy reflections begin again to pour in upon me. Yet what can I do?—I believe I ſhall take it back again the firſt thing I do in the morning.—Yet whatcanI do? 

For fear they ſhould have an earlier day in their intention, than that which will too ſoon come, I will begin to be very ill. Nor need I feign much; for indeed, I am extremely low, weak, and faint. 

I hope to depoſite this early in the morning for you, as I ſhall return from reſuming my letter, if I do reſume it, as myinwardeſtmind bids me. 

Altho' it is now near Two o'clock, I have a good mind to ſlide down once more, in order to take back my letter. Our doors are always locked and barred up at a eleven; but the ſeats of the leſſer hall windows being almoſt even with the ground without, and the ſhutters not difficult to open, I could eaſily get out.— 

Yet why ſhould I be thus uneaſy?—Since, ſhould the letter go, I can but hear what Mr. Lovelace ſays to it. His aunts live at too great a diſtance for him to have an immediate anſwer from them; ſo I can ſcruple going off till I have invitation. I caninſiſtupon one of his couſins meeting me, as I have hinted, in the chariot; and he may not be able to obtain that favour from either of them. Twenty things may happen to afford me a ſuſpenſion, at leaſt: Why ſhould I be ſo very uneaſy?—When, too, I can reſume it early, before it is probable he will have the thought of finding it there. Yet he owns he ſpends three parts of his days, and has done for this fortnight paſt, in loitering about in one diſguiſe or other, beſidesthe attendance given by his truſty ſervant, when he himſelf is notin waiting,as he calls it. 

But theſe ſtrange fore-bodings!—Yet I can, if you adviſe, cauſe the chariot he ſhall bring with him, to carry me directly for town, whither in my London ſcheme, if you were to approve it, I had propoſed to go: And This will ſave you the trouble of procuring for me a vehicle; as well as the ſuſpicion from your mamma of contributing to my eſcape. 

But, ſollicitous for your advice, and approbation too, if Icanhave it, I will put an end to this letter. 

Adieu, my deareſt friend, adieu! 

LETTER. XXXVII. MiſsCLARISSA HARLOWE,To MiſsHOWE.
Friday Morning, Seven o'Clock, April 7.MY aunt Hervey, who is a very early riſer, was walking in the garden, (Betty attending her, as I ſaw from my window this morning) when I aroſe; for, after ſuch a train of fatigue and reſtleſs nights, I had unhappily overſlept myſelf: So all I durſt venture upon, was, to ſtep down to my poultry-yard, and depoſite mine of yeſterday, and laſt night. And I am juſt come up; for ſhe is ſtill in the garden: This prevents me from going to reſume my letter, as I think ſtill to do; and hope it will not be too late. 

I ſaid, I had unhappily overſlept myſelf. I went to bed at about half an hour after Two. I told the quarters till Five; after which I dropt aſleep, and awaked not till paſt Six, and then in great terror from a dream, which has made ſuch an impreſſion upon me, that, ſlightly as I think of dreams, I cannot help taking this opportunity to relate it to you. 

'Methought my brother, my uncle Antony, and Mr. Solmes, had formed a plot to deſtroy Mr.Lovelace; who diſcovering it, turned all his rage againſt me, believing I had a hand in it. I thought he made them all fly into foreign parts upon it; and afterwards ſeizing upon me, carried me into a church-yard; and there, notwithſtanding all my prayers and tears, and proteſtations of innocence, ſtabbed me to the heart, and then tumbled me into a deep grave ready dug, among two or three half-diſſolved carcaſes; throwing in the dirt and earth upon me, with his hands, and trampling it down with his feet.' 

I awoke with the terror, all in a cold ſweat, trembling, and in agonies; and ſtill the frightful images raiſed by it, remain upon my memory. 

But why ſhould I, who have ſuchrealevils to contend with, regardimaginaryones? This, no doubt, was owing to my diſturbed imagination; huddling together wildly all the frightful ideas which my aunt's communications and diſcourſe, my letter to Mr. Lovelace, my own uneaſineſs upon it, and the apprehenſions of the dreaded Wedneſday, furniſhed me with. 

Eight o'Clock.THE man, my dear, has got the letter!—What a ſtrange diligence! I wiſh he mean me well, that he takes ſo much pains!—Yet, muſt own, that I ſhould be diſpleaſed, if he took leſs—I wiſh, however, he had been an hundred miles off!—What an advantage have I given him over me! 

Now the letter is out of my power, I have more uneaſineſs and regret, than I had before. For, till now, I had a doubt whether it ſhould, or ſhould not go: And now I think it oughtnotto have gone. And yet is there any-other way, than to do as I have done, if I would avoid Solmes? But what a giddy creature ſhall I be thought, if I purſue the cuurſe to which this letter muſt lead me? 

My deareſt friend, tell me, have I done wrong!—Yet do notſayI have, if youthinkit; for ſhould all the world beſides condemn me, I ſhall have ſome comfort, ifyoudo not. The firſt time I ever beſought you to flatter me. That, of itſelf, is an indication, that I have done wrong, and am afraid of hearing the truth—O tell me [but yet do not tell me], if I have done wrong! 

Friday, Eleven o'Clock.MY aunt has made me another viſit. She began what ſhe had to ſay, with letting me know, That my friends are all perſuaded, that I ſtill correſpond with Mr. Lovelace; as is plain, ſhe ſaid, by hints and menaces he throws out, which ſhews, that he is apprized of ſeveral things that have paſſed between my relations and me, ſometimes within a very little while after they have happened. 

Altho' I approve not of the method he ſtoops to take to come at his intelligence, yet is it not prudent in me to clear myſelf by the ruin of the corrupted ſervant [as his vileneſs has neither my connivance, nor approbation], ſince my doing ſo might occaſion the detection of my own correſpondence; and ſo fruſtrate all the hopes I have to avoid this Solmes. Yet it is not at all unlikely, that this very agent of Mr. Lovelace plays booty between my brother and him: How elſe canour familyknow (ſoſoontoo) his menaces upon the paſſages they hint at? 

I aſſured my aunt, that I was too much aſhamed of the treatment I met with, for every-one's ſake, as well as for my own, to acquaint Mr. Lovelace with the particulars of it, were the means of correſponding with him afforded me: That I had reaſon to think, that if he were to know of it from me, we muſt be upon ſuch terms, that he would not ſcruple making ſome viſits, which would give me great apprehenſions. They all knew, I ſaid, that I had no communicationwith any of my papa's ſervants, except my ſiſter's Betty Barnes: For altho' I had a good opinion of them all, and believed, if left to their own inclinations, they would be glad to ſerve me; yet, finding by their ſhy behaviour, that they were under particular direction, I had forborne ever ſince my Hannah had been ſo diſgracefully diſmiſſed, ſo much as to ſpeak to any of them, for fear I ſhould be the occaſion of their loſing their places too: They muſt, therefore, account amongthemſelvesfor the intelligence Mr. Lovelace met with, ſince neither my brother, nor ſiſter, (as Betty had frequently, in praiſe of their ſincerity, informed me) nor perhaps their favourite Mr. Solmes, were at all careful who they ſpoke before, when they had any thing to throw out againſt him, or even againſtme,whom they took great pride to join with him on this occaſion. 

It was but too natural, my aunt ſaid, for my friends to ſuppoſe, that he had his intelligence, part of it at leaſt, from me; who, thinking myſelf hardly treated, might complain of it, if not to him, to Miſs Howe; which, perhaps, might be the ſame thing; for they knew Miſs Howe ſpoke as freely of them, as they could do of Mr. Lovelace; and muſt have the particulars ſhe ſpoke of, from ſome-body, who knew what was done here. That this determined my papa to bring the whole matter to a ſpeedy iſſue, leſt fatal conſequences ſhould enſue. 

I perceive you are going to ſpeak with warmth, proceeded ſhe [And ſo I was]—For my own part I am ſure, you would not write any thing, if youdowrite, to inflame ſo violent a ſpirit.—But this is not the end of my preſent viſit.— 

You cannot, my dear, but be convinced, that your fatherwillbeobeyed.The more you contend againſt his will, the more he thinks himſelf obliged to aſſert his authority. Your mamma deſires me to tell you, that if you will give her the leaſt hopes ofa dutiful compliance, ſhe will be willing to ſee you in her cloſet juſt now, while your papa is gone to take a walk in the garden. 

Aſtoniſhing perſiſtence, ſaid I!—I am tired with making declarations and pleadings on this ſubject; and had hoped, that my reſolution being ſo well known, I ſhould not have been further urged upon it. 

You miſtake the purport of my preſent viſit, Miſs [looking gravely]. Heretofore you have beendeſiredandprayed,to obey and oblige your friends:Intreatyis at an end: They give it up. Now it isreſolved upon,that your father's willis to be obeyed; as it is fit it ſhould. Some things are laid at your door, as if you concurred with Lovelace's threatened violence to carry you off; which your mamma will not believe. She will tell you her own good opinion of you: She will tell you how much ſhe ſtill loves you: And what ſhe expects of you on the approaching occaſion: But yet, that ſhe may not be expoſed to an oppoſition, which would the more provoke her, ſhe deſires, you will firſt aſſure her, that you go down with a reſolution to do that with a grace which muſt be done with or without a grace. And beſides, ſhe wants to give you ſome advice how to proceed, in order to reconcile yourſelf to your papa, and to every-body elſe. Will you go down, Miſs, or will you not? 

I ſaid, I ſhould think myſelf happy, could I be admitted to my mamma's preſence, after ſo long a baniſhment from it; but that I could not wiſh it upon thoſe terms. 

And This is your anſwer, Miſs? 

It muſt be my anſwer, Madam. Come what may, I never will have Mr. Solmes. I am very much concerned, that this matter is ſo often preſs'd upon me.—I never will have that man! 

Down ſhe went with diſpleaſure. I could not help it. I was quite tired with ſo many attempts, all tothe ſame purpoſe. I am amazed that They are not!—So little variation! And no conceſſion on either ſide! 

I will go down and depoſite this; for Betty has ſeen I have been writing. The ſaucy creature took a napkin, and dipt it in water, and with a fleering air, Here, Miſs; holding the wet corner to me. 

What's That for, ſaid I? 

Only, Miſs, one of the fingers of your right-hand, if you pleaſe to look at it. 

It was inky. 

I gave her a look; but ſaid nothing. 

But leſt I ſhould have another ſearch, I will cloſe. here. 

CL. HARLOWE.LETTER XXXVIII. MiſsCLARISSA HARLOWE,To MiſsHOWE.
Friday, One o'Clock.I Have a letter from Mr. Lovelace, full of tranſports, vows, and promiſes. I will ſend it to you incloſed. You'll ſee how he engages in it for his aunt Lawrance's protection, and for Miſs Charlotte Montague's accompanying me.'I have nothing to do, but to perſevere, he ſays, and prepare to receive the perſonal congratulations of his whole family.' 

But you'll ſee, how he preſumes upon my beinghis,as the conſequence of throwing myſelf into that Lady's protection. 

The chariot-and-fix is to be ready at the place he mentions. You'll ſee, as to the ſlur upon my reputation, which I am ſo apprehenſive about, how boldly he argues. Generouſly enough, indeed, were I to behis; and had given him reaſon to believe that I would!—But that I have not done. 

How one ſtep brings on another with this incroachingSex! How ſoon may a young creature, who gives a man the leaſt encouragement, be carried beyond her intentions, and out of her own power!—You would imagine, by what he writes, that I have given him reaſon to think, that my averſion to Mr. Solmes is all owing to my favour for him! 

The dreadful thing is, that, comparing what he writes from his intelligencer, of what is deſigned againſt me [though he ſeems not to know the threatened day] with what my aunt and Betty aſſure me of, there can be no hope for me, but that I muſt be Solmes's wife, if I ſtay here. 

I had better have gone to my uncle Antony's, at this rate! I ſhould have gained time, at leaſt, by it. This is the fruit of his fine contrivances! 

'What we are to do, and how good he is to be: How I am to direct all his future ſteps.'All this ſhews, as I ſaid before, that he is ſure of me. 

However, I have reply'd to the following effect:'That although I had given him room to expect, that I would put myſelf into his aunt's protection; yet, as I have three days to come, between this and Monday, and as I hope that my friends will still relent, or that Mr. Solmes will give up a point they will both find it impoſſible to carry; I ſhall not look upon myſelf as abſolutely bound by the appointment: And expect therefore, if I recede, that I ſhall not be called to account for it by him. That I think it neceſſary to acquaint him, that if, by putting myſelf into Lady Betty Lawrance's protection, he underſtands, that I mean directly to throw myſelf intohispower, he is very much miſtaken: For that there are many points in which I muſt be ſatisfied; ſeveral matters to be adjuſted, even, after I have left this houſe (if I do leave it), before I can think of giving him any particular encouragement: That, in the firſt place, he muſt expect, that I will do my utmoſt to procure my father's reconciliation andapprobation of my future ſteps; and that I will govern myſelf intirely by his commands, in every (reaſonable point, as much as if I had not left his houſe: That if he imagines, that I ſhall not reſerve to myſelf this liberty, but that my withdrawing is to give him any advantages, which he would otherwiſe have had; I am determined to tarry where I am, and abide the event, in hopes that my friends will ſtill accept of my reiterated promiſe, never to marry him, or any-body elſe, without their conſent.' 

This I will depoſite as ſoon as I can. And as he thinks things are near their criſis, I dare ſay it will not be long before I have an anſwer to it. 

Friday, Four o'Clock.I AM far from being well: Yet muſt: I make myſelf worſe than I am, preparative to the ſuſpenſion I hope to obtain of the menaced evil of Wedneſday next. And if I do obtain it, I will poſtpone my appointment to meet Mr. Lovelace. 

Betty has told them I am very much indiſpoſed. But I have no pity from any-body. 

I believe, I am become the object of every-one's averſion; and that they would all be glad I were dead.—Indeed, I believe it!—'What ails the perverſe creature,'cries one?—'Is ſhe love-ſick,'another? 

I was in the Ivy-ſummer-houſe, and came out ſhivering with cold, as if aguiſhly ſeized. Betty obſerved this, and reported it.—'O, no matter!—Let her ſhiver on!—Cold cannot hurt her. Obſtinacy will defend her from That. Perverſeneſs is a Bracer to a love-ſick girl, and more effectual than the Cold Bath to make hardy, altho' the conſtitution be ever ſo tender.' 

This ſaid by a cruel brother, and heard ſaid by the dearer friends of one, for whom, but a few monthsago, every-body was apprehenſive at every blaſt of wind to which ſhe expoſed herſelf! 

Betty, it muſt be owned, has an admirable memory on theſe occaſions. Nothing of this nature is loſt by her repetition: Even the very air ſhe repeats with, renders it unneceſſary to aſk, Who ſaid This or That ſevere thing. 

Friday, Six o'Clock.MY aunt, who again ſtays all night, has juſt left me. She came to tell me the reſult of my friends deliberations about me. It is this. 

Next Wedneſday morning they are all to be aſſembled: To wit, my father, mother, my uncles, herſelf, and my uncle Hervey; my brother and ſiſter of courſe; my good Mrs. Norton is likewiſe to be admitted: And Dr. Lewin is to be at hand, to exhort me, it ſeems, if there be occaſion: But my aunt is not certain, whether he is to be among them, or to tarry till called in. 

When this awful court is ſet, the poor priſoner is to be brought in, ſupported by Mrs. Norton; who is to be firſt tutored to inſtruct me in the duty of a child; which, it ſeems, I have quite forgotten. 

Nor is the ſucceſs at all doubted, my aunt ſays: For it is not believed I can be ſo harden'd, as to withſtand ſo venerable a judicature, altho' I have withſtood ſeveral of them ſeparately. And ſtill the leſs, as ſhe hints at extraordinary condeſcenſions from my papa. But what condeſcenſions, from even my father, can induce me to make ſuch a ſacrifice as is expected from me? 

Yet my ſpirits will never bear up, I doubt, at ſuch a tribunal: My father preſiding in it. 

I believed indeed, that my trials would not be at an end, till he had admitted me once more into his awful preſence! 

What is hoped from me, ſhe ſays, is, That Iwill chearfully, on Tueſday night, if not before, ſign the articles; and ſo turn the ſucceeding day's ſolemn convention of all my friends, into a day of feſtivity, I am to have the licence ſent me up, however, and once more the ſettlements, that I may ſee how much in earneſt they are. 

She further hinted, that my papa himſelf would bring up the ſettlements for me to ſign. 

O my dear! what a trial will This be!—How ſhall I be able to refuſe to my father [My father! from whoſe preſence I have been ſo long baniſh'd; he commanding and intreating, perhaps, in a breath! How ſhall I be able to refuſe to my father] the writing of my name? 

They are ſure, ſhe ſays, ſomething is working on Mr. Lovelace's part, and perhaps on mine: And my papa would ſooner follow me to the grave, than ſee mehiswife. 

I ſaid, I was not well; That the very apprehenſions of theſe trials, were already inſupportable to me; and would increaſe upon me, as the time approached; and I was afraid I ſhould be extremely ill. 

They had prepared themſelves for ſuch anartificeas That, was my aunt's unkind word; and ſhe could aſſure me, it would ſtand me in no ſtead. 

Artifice!repeated I: And this from my aunt Hervey? 

Why my dear, ſaid ſhe, do you think people are fools?—Can they not ſee, how diſmally you endeavour to ſigh yourſelf down within-doors?—How you hang down yourſweet face[thoſe were the words ſhe was pleaſed to uſe] upon your boſom:—How you totter, as it were, and hold by this chair, and by that door-poſt, when you know that Any-body ſees you [This, my dear Miſs Howe, is an aſperſion to faſten hypocriſy and contempt upon me: My brother's or ſiſter's aſperſion!—I am not capable of artsſo low]. But the moment you are down with your poultry, or advancing upon your garden-walk, and, as you imagine, out of every-body's ſight, it is ſeen how nimbly you trip along; and what an alertneſs governs all your motions. 

I ſhould hate myſelf, ſaid I, were I capable of ſuch poorartificesas theſe. I muſt be a fool to uſe them, as well as a mean creature; for have I not had experience enough, that my friends are incapable of being moved in much moreaffecting inſtances?—But you'll ſee how I ſhall be by Tueſday. 

My dear, you will not offer any violence to your health?—I hope, God has given you more grace, than to do that. 

I hope he has, Madam. But there is violence enough offer'd, and threatened, to affect my health; and that will be found, without my needing to have recourſe to any other, or toartificeeither. 

I'll only tell you one thing, my dear: And that is; Ill or well, the ceremony will probably be performed before Wedneſday-night:—But This, alſo, I will tell you, altho' beyond my preſent commiſſion, that Mr. Solmes will be under an engagement, (if you ſhould require it of him, as a favour) after the ceremony is paſſed, and Lovelace's hopes thereby utterly extinguiſhed, to leave you at your father's, and return to his own houſe every evening, until you are brought to a full ſenſe of your duty, and conſent to acknowlege your change of name. 

There was no opening of my lips to ſuch a ſpeech as This. I was dumb. 

And theſe, my dear Miſs Howe, are They, whoſomeof them, at leaſt, have called me a romantic girl!—This is my chimerical brother, and wiſ•ſiſter; both joining their heads together, I dare ſay▪And yet, my aunt told me, that the laſt part wa•what took in my mamma; who had, till that wa•ſtarted, inſiſted, that her child ſhould not be marriedif, thro' grief or oppoſition, ſhe ſhould be ill, or fall into fits. 

This intended violence my aunt often excuſed, by the certain information they pretended to have, of ſome plots or machinations, that were ready to break out, from Mr. LovelaceIt may not be amiſs to obſerve in this place, That Mr. Lovelace artfully contrived to drive them on, by permittinghisagent andtheirs,to report machinations, which he had no intention, nor power, to execute.: The effects of which were thus cunningly to be fruſtrated. 

Friday, Nine o'Clock.AND now, my dear, what ſhall I conclude upon? You ſee how determin'd—But how can I expect your advice will come time enough to ſtand me in any ſtead? For here, I have been down, and already have another letter from Mr. Lovelace [The man lives upon the ſpot, I think]: And I muſt write to him, either that I will, or will not, ſtand to my firſt reſolution of eſcaping hence on Monday next. If I let him know, that I will not (appearances ſo ſtrongagainſthim, andforSolmes, even ſtronger, than when I made the appointment), will it not be juſtly deemed my own fault, if I am compelled to marry their odious man? And if any miſchief enſue from Mr. Lovelace's rage and diſappointment, will it not lie at my door?—Yet, he offers ſo fair!—Yet, on the other hand, to incur the cenſure of the world, as a giddy creature!—But that, as he hints, I have already incurred!—What can I do? Oh! that my couſin Morden!—But what ſignifies wiſhing? 

I will here give you the ſubſtance of Mr. Lovelace's letter. The letter itſelf I will ſend, when I have anſwered it; but that I will defer doing as long as I can, in hopes of finding reaſon to retract an appointment on which ſo much depends. And yet it is neceſſary you ſhould have all before you, as I goalong, that you may be the better able to adviſe me in this dreadful criſis of my fate. 

'He begs my pardon, for writing with ſo much aſſurance; attributing it to his unbounded tranſport; and intirely acquieſces in my will. He is full of alternatives and propoſals. He offers to attend me directly to Lady Betty's; or, if I had rather, to my own eſtate; and that my Lord M. ſhall protect me there, [He knows not, my dear, my reaſons for rejecting this inconſiderate advice]. In either caſe, as ſoon as he ſees me ſafe, he will go up to London, or whither I pleaſe; and not come near me, but by my own permiſſion; and till I am ſatisfy'd in every thing I am doubtful of, as well with regard to his reformation, as to ſettlements, &c. 

'To conduct me to You, my dear, is another of his alternatives, not doubting, he ſays, but your mamma will receive me. Or, if That be not agreeable to you, to your mamma, or to me, he will put me into Mr. Hickman's protection; whom, no doubt, Miſs Howe can influence; and that it may be given out, that I am gone to Bath, or Briſtol, or Abroad; where-ever I pleaſe. 

'Again, If it be more agreeable, he propoſes to attend me privately to London, where he will procure handſome lodgings for me, and both his couſins Montague to receive me there, and to accompany me till all ſhall be adjuſted to my mind; and till a reconciliation ſhall be effected; which, he aſſures me, nothing ſhall be wanting in him to facilitate; greatly as he has been inſulted by all my family. 

'Theſe ſeveral meaſures he propoſes to my choice; it being unlikely, he ſays, that he can procure in the time, a letter from Lady Betty, under her own hand, inviting me in form to her houſe, unleſs he had been himſelf to go to that Lady for it; which, at this critical conjuncture, while he is attending my commands, is impoſſible. 

'He conjures me, in the ſolemneſt manner, if I would not throw him into utter deſpair, to keep to my appoinment. 

'However, inſtead of threatening my relations, or Solmes, if I recede, he reſpectfully ſays, that he doubts not, but that, if I do, it will be upon ſuch reaſons, as he ought to be ſatisfy'd with; upon no ſlighter, he hopes, than their leaving me at full liberty to purſue my own inclinations: In which (whatever they ſhall be), he will intirely acquieſce; only endeavouring to make his future good behaviour, the ſole ground for his expectation of my favour. 

'In ſhort, he ſolemnly vows, that hiswholeview at preſent, is, To free me from my impriſonment; and to reſtore me to my own free-will, in a point ſo abſolutely neceſſary to my future happineſs. He declares, that neither the hopes he has in my future favour, nor the honour of himſelf and family, will permit him to propoſe any thing that ſhall be inconſiſtent with my own moſt ſcrupulous notions: And, for my mind's ſake, ſhould chooſe to have this end obtained by my friends declining to compel me. But that, nevertheleſs, as to the world's opinion, it is impoſſible to imagine, that the behaviour of my relations to me, has not already brought upon my family thoſe free cenſures which they deſerve, and cauſed the ſtep which I am ſo ſcrupulous about taking, to be no other than the natural and expected conſequence of their treatment of me.' 

Indeed, I am afraid all this is true: And it is owing to ſome little degree of politeneſs, that Mr. Lovelace does not ſay all he might ſay on this ſubject: For I have no doubt, that I am the talk, and perhaps the by-word of half the county. If ſo, I am afraid, I can now do nothing that will give me more diſgrace than I have already ſo cauſeleſly received by their indiſcreet perſecutions: And let me be whoſe I will, and do what I will, I ſhall never wipe off the ſtain my confinement,and the rigorous uſage I have received, have fixed upon me; at leaſt in my own opinion. 

I wiſh, if ever I am to be conſidered as one of the eminent family this man is ally'd to, ſome of them do not think the worſe of me, for the diſgrace I have received!—In that caſe, perhaps, I ſhall be obliged to him, ifhedo not. You ſee how much this harſh, this cruel, treatment from my own family has humbled me!—But, perhaps, I was too much exalted before. 

Mr. Lovelace concludes,'with repeatedly begging an interview with me; and That,thisnight, if poſſible: An honour, he ſays, he is the more encouraged to ſolicit for, as I had twice before made him hope for it. But whether he obtain it, or not, he beſeeches me to chooſe one of the alternatives he offers to my acceptance; and not to depart from my reſolution of eſcaping on Monday, unleſs the reaſon ceaſes on which I had taken it up; and that I have a proſpect of being reſtored to my friends favour; at leaſt to my own liberty and freedom of choice.' 

He renews all his vows and promiſes on this head, in ſo earneſt and ſo ſolemn a manner, that (his own intereſt, and his family's honour, and their favour for me, co-operating) I can have no room to doubt of his ſincerity. 

LETTER XXXIX. MiſsCLARISSA HARLOWE,To MiſsHOWE.
Sat. Morn, 8 o' Clock, April 8.WHether you will blame me, or not, I cannot tell, But I have depoſited a letter confirming my former reſolution to leave this houſe on Monday next, within the hours, if poſſible, prefixed in my former. I have not kept a copy of it. But this is the ſubſtance: 

I tell him,'That I have no way to avoid the determin'd reſolution of my friends in behalf of Mr. Solmes; but by abandoning this houſe by his aſſiſtance.' 

I have not pretended to make a merit with him on this ſcore; for I plainly tell him,'That could I, without an unpardonable ſin, the when Iwould,I would ſooner make death my choice, than take a ſtep, which all the world, if not my own heart, will condemn me for taking.' 

I tell him,'That I ſhall not try to bring any other cloaths with me, than thoſe I ſhall have on; and thoſe but my common wearing-apparel; leſt I ſhould be ſuſpected. That I muſt expect to be deny'd the poſſeſſion of my eſtate: But that I am determin'd never to conſent to a litigation with my father, were I to be reduced to ever ſo low a ſtate: So that the protection I am to be obliged for, to any one, muſt be alone for the diſtreſs-ſake: And yet, that I have too much pride to think of marrying, until I have a fortune that ſhall make me appear upon a foot of equality with, and void of obligation to, any-body: That, therefore, he will have nothing to hope for from this ſtep, that he had not before: And that, in every light, I reſerve to myſelf to accept or refuſe his addreſs, as his behaviour and circumſpection ſhall appear to me to deſerve.' 

I tell him,'That I think it beſt to go into a private lodging, in the neighbourhood of his aunt Lawrance; and not to her houſe; that it may not appear to the world, that I have refuged myſelf in his family; and that a reconciliation with my friends, may not, on that account, be made impracticable: That I will ſend for thither my faithful Hannah; and apprize only Miſs Howe where I am: That he ſhall inſtantly leave me, and go to London, or to one of his uncle's ſeats; and (as he had promiſed)not come near me, but by my leave; contenting himſelf with a correſpondence by letter only. 

'That if I find myſelf in danger of being diſcovered, and carried back by violence, I will then throw myſelf directly into the protection of either of his aunts, who will receive me: But This only in caſe of abſolute neceſſity; for that it will be more to my reputation, for me, by the beſt means I can, (taking advantage of my privacy) to enter by a ſecond or third hand into a treaty of reconciliation with my friends. 

'That I muſt, however, plainly tell him, That if, in this treaty, my friends inſiſt upon my reſolveing againſt marrying him, I will engage to comply with them; provided they will allow me to promiſe him, that I will never be any other man's, while he remains ſingle, or is living: That this is a compliment I am willing to pay to him, in return for the trouble and pains he has taken, and the uſage he has met with, on my account: Altho' I intimate, that he may, in a great meaſure, thank himſelf, and the little regard he has paid to his reputation; for the ſlights he has met with.' 

I tell him,'That I may, in this privacy, write to my couſin Morden, and, if poſſible, intereſt him in my cauſe. 

'I take ſome brief notice of his alternatives.' 

You muſt think, my dear, that this unhappy force upon me, and this projected flight, makes it neceſſary for me to account to him much ſooner than it agrees with my ſtomach to do, for every part of my conduct. 

'It is not to be expected, I tell him, that your mamma will embroil herſelf, or ſuffer you, or Mr. Hickman to be embroiled, on my account: And as to his propoſal of my going to London, I am ſuch an abſolute ſtranger to every-body there, and haveſuch a bad opinion of the place, that I cannot by any means think of going thither; except I ſhould be induced, ſome time hence, by the Ladies of his family to attend them. 

'As to the meeting he is deſirous of, I think it by no means proper; eſpecially as it is ſo likely that I may ſoon ſee him. But that if any thing occurs to induce me to change my mind, as to withdrawing, I may then, very probably, take the firſt opportunity to ſee him, and give him my reaſons for that change.' 

This, my dear, I the leſs ſcrupled to write, that I might qualify him for ſuch a diſappointment, ſhould I give it; he having, beſides, behaved ſo very unexceptionably, when he ſurprized me ſome time ago in the lonely woodhouſe. 

Finally,'I commend myſelf, as a perſon in diſtreſs, and merely as ſuch, tohishonour, and to hisaunt's protection. I repeat [moſt cordially, I am ſure!] my deep concern for being forced to take a ſtep ſo diſagreeable, and ſo derogatory to my honour. And having told him, that I will endeavour to obtain leave to dine in the Ivy ſummer-houſeTheIvy ſummer-houſe,orIvy bower,as it was ſometimes called in the family, was a place, that from a girl, this young Lady delighted in. She uſed, in the ſummer-months, frequently to ſit and work, and read, and write, and draw, and (when permitted) to breakfaſt, and dine, and ſometimes to ſup, in it; eſpecially when Miſs Howe, who had an equal liking to it, was her viſitor and gueſt. 

She deſcribes it, in another letter, as'angularly pointing to a pretty variegated landſchape of wood, water, and hilly country; which had pleaſed her ſo much, that ſhe had drawn it; the piece hanging up, in her parlour, among ſome of her other drawings.' 

, and to ſend Betty of ſome errand, when there, I leave the reſt to him; but imagine, that about four o' clock will be a proper time for him to contrive ſome ſignal to let me know he is at hand, and for me to unbolt the garden-door.' 

I added, by way of poſtſcript,'That their ſuſpicionsſeeming to increaſe, I adviſe him to contrive to ſend or come to the uſual place, as frequently as poſſible, in the interval of time, till Monday morning ten or eleven o' clock; as ſomething may poſſibly happen to make me alter my mind.' 

O my dear Miſs Howe!—what a ſad, ſad thing is the neceſſity, forced upon me, for all this preparation and contrivance!—But it is now too late!—But how!—Too late,did I ſay?—What a word isthat!—what a dreadful thing,wereI to repent, tofindit to be too late, to remedy the apprehended evil! 

Saturday, Ten o' Clock.Mr. Solmes is here. He is to dine with his new relations, as Betty tells me he already calls them. 

He would have thrown himſelf in my way, once more: But I hurry'd up to my priſon, in my return from my garden-walk, to avoid him. 

I had, when in the garden, the curioſity to ſee, if my letter were gone: I cannot ſay, with an intention to take it back again, if it had not; becauſe I ſee not how I could do otherwiſe than I have done. Yet what a caprice was this!—For when I found it gone, I began (as yeſterday-morning) to wiſh it had not: For no other reaſon, I believe, than becauſe it was out of my power. 

A ſtrange diligence in this man!—Heſays,he almoſt lives upon the place; and I think ſo too. 

He mentions, as you will ſee in his letter, four ſeveral diſguiſes, which he put on in one day. It is a wonder, nevertheleſs, that he has not been ſeen by ſome of our tenants: For it is impoſſible that any diſguiſe can hide the gracefulneſs of his figure. But this is to be ſaid, that the adjoining grounds being all in our own hands, and no common foot-paths near that part of the garden, and thro' the park and coppice, nothing can be more bye and unfrequented. 

Then they are leſs watchful, I believe, over mygarden-walks, and my poultry-viſits, depending, as my aunt hinted, upon the bad character they have taken ſo much pains to faſten upon Mr. Lovelace. This, they think (and juſtly think), muſt fill me with doubts. And then the regard I have hitherto had for my reputation, is another of their ſecurities. Were it not for theſe two, they would not ſurely have uſed me as they have done; and at the ſame time left me the opportunities, which I have ſeveral times had, to get away, had I been diſpoſed to do ſoThey might, no doubt, make a dependence upon the reaſons ſhe gives: But their chief reliance was upon the vigilance of their Joſeph Leman; little imagining, what an implement he was of Mr. Lovelace.: And indeed, their dependencies on both theſe motives would have been well founded, had they kept but tolerable meaſures with me. 

Then, perhaps, they have no notion of the back-door; as it is ſeldom open'd, and leads to a place ſo pathleſs and loneſomeThis, in another of her letters, is thus deſcribed:—'A piece of ruins upon it, the remains of an old chapel, now ſtanding in the midſt of the coppice; here and there an overgrown oak, ſurrounded with ivy and miſletoe, ſtarting up, to ſanctify, as it were, the awful ſolemneſs of the place: A ſpot, too, where a man having been found hanging ſome years ago, it was uſed to be thought of by us when children, and by the maid-ſervants, with a degree of terror; as the habitation of owls, ravens, and other ominous birds; and as haunted by ghoſts, goblins, ſpectres: The genuine reſult of country lonelineſs and ignorance: Notions which, early propagated, are apt to leave impreſſions even upon minds grown ſtrong enough, at the ſame time, to deſpiſe the like credulous follies in others.'. If not, therecanbe no other way to go off (if one would), without diſcovery, unleſs by the plaſhy lane, ſo full of ſprings, by which your ſervant reaches the ſolitary wood-houſe; to which lane one muſt deſcend from a high bank, that bounds the poultry-yard. For, as to the front-way, you know, one muſt paſs thro' the houſe to That, and in ſight of the parlours, and the ſervants hall; then have the large open court-yard to go through, and, by means of the iron-gate, be full in view, as one paſſesover the lawn, for a quarter of a mile together; the young plantations of elms and limes affording yet but little ſhade or covert. 

The Ivy ſummer-houſe is the moſt convenient for this affecting purpoſe of any ſpot in the garden, as it is not far from the back-door, and yet in another alley, as you may remember. Then it is ſeldom reſorted to by any-body elſe, except in the ſummer-months, becauſe it is cool. When they loved me, they would often, for this reaſon, object to my long continuance in it:—But now, it is no matter what becomes of me. Beſides,cold is a bracer,as my brother ſaid yeſterday. 

Here I will depoſite what I have written. Let me have your prayers, my dear; and your approbation, or your cenſure, of the ſteps I have taken: For yet it may not be quite too late to revoke the appointment. I am 

Your moſt affectionate and faithful CL. HARLOWE.Why will you ſend your ſervant empty-handed? 

LETTER XL. MiſsHOWE,To MiſsCLARISSA HARLOWE.
Sat. Afternoon.BY your laſt date of Ten, in your letter of this day, you could not long have depoſited it, before Robin took it. He rode hard, and brought it to me juſt as I had riſen from table. 

You may juſtly blame me for ſending my meſſenger empty-handed, your ſituation conſider'd; and yet that very ſituation [ſo critical!] is partly the reaſon for it: For indeed I knew not what to write, fit to ſend you. 

I had been inquiring privately, how to procure you a conveyance from Harlowe-Place, and yet not appear in it; knowing, that to oblige in thefact,andto diſoblige in themanner,is but obliging by halves: My mamma being, moreover, very ſuſpicious, and very uneaſy; made more ſo by daily viſits from your uncle Antony, who tells her, that now every-thing is upon the point of being determined, and hopes, that her daughter will not ſo interfere, as to diſcourage your compliance with their wills. This I came at by a way that I cannot take notice of, orbothſhould hear of it, in a mannerneitherwould like: And,withoutthat, my mamma and I have had almoſt hourly bickerings. 

I found more difficulty than I expected, as the time was confined, and ſecreſy required, in procuring you a vehicle; and as you ſo earneſtly forbid me to accompany you in your enterprize. Had you not obliged me to keep meaſures with my mamma, I could have managed it with eaſe. I could even have taken our own chariot, on one pretence or other, and put two horſes extraordinary to it, if I had thought fit; and I could have ſent it back from London, and no-body the wiſer as to the lodgings we might have taken. 

I wiſh to the Lord, you had permitted This! Indeed I think you are two punctilious a great deal for your ſituation. Would you expect to enjoy yourſelf with your uſual placidneſs, and not be ruffled, in an hurricane which every moment threatens to blow your houſe down? 

Had your diſtreſs ſprung from yourſelf, that would have been another thing. But when all the world knows where to lay the fault, this alters the caſe. 

How can you ſay I am happy, when my mamma, to her power, is as much an abettor of their wickedneſs to my deareſt friend, as your aunt, or any-body elſe?—And this thro' the inſtigation of that odd-headed and fooliſh uncle of yours, who [ſorry creature that he is] keeps her up to reſolutions, which are unworthy of her, for an example to me, and pleaſe you.Is not this cauſe enough for me to ground a reſentment upon, ſufficient to juſtify me for accompanying you; the friendſhip between us ſo well known? 

Indeed, my dear, the importance of the caſe conſider'd, I muſt repeat, That you are too nice. Don't they already think, that your standing-out is owing a good deal to my advice? Have they not prohibited our correſpondence upon that very ſurmize? And have I, but onyouraccount, reaſon to valuewhatthey think? 

Beſides, what diſcredit have I to fear by ſuch a ſtep? What detriment? Would Hickman, do you believe, refuſe me upon it?—If he did, ſhould I be ſorry for that?—Who is it, that has a Soul, who would not be affected by ſuch an inſtance of female friendſhip? 

But I ſhould vex and diſorder my mamma!—Well, that is ſomething! But not more than ſhe vexes and diſorders me, on her being made an implement by ſuch a ſorry creature, who ambles hither every day in ſpite to my deareſt friend.—Woe be toboth,if it be for adouble end!—Chide me, if you will: I don't care. 

I ſay, and I inſist upon it, ſuch a ſtep wouldennobleyour friend: And if ſtill you will permit it, I will take the office out of Lovelace's hands; and, to-morrow evening, or on Monday, before his time of appointment takes place, will come in a chariot, or chaiſe: And then, my dear, if we get off as I wiſh, will we make terms, and what terms we pleaſe, with them All. My mamma will be glad to receive her daughter again, I warrant ye: And Hickman will cry forjoyon my return; or he ſhall forſorrow. 

But you are ſo very earneſtly angry with me for propoſing ſuch a ſtep, and have always ſo much to ſay for your ſide of any queſtion, that I am afraid to urge it farther.—Only be ſo good as to encourage me to reſume it, if, upon farther conſideration, and uponweighing matters well [and inthislight, Whether beſt to go off withme,or withLovelace], you can get over your punctilious regard for my reputation. A woman going off with a woman is not ſo diſcreditable a thing, ſurely! and with no view, but to avoid the fellows!—I ſay, only be ſo good as toconſiderthis point; and if you can get over your ſcruples, onmyaccount, do. And ſo I will have done with this argument for the preſent; and apply myſelf to ſome of the paſſages in yours. 

A time, I hope, will come, that I ſhall be able to read your affecting narratives, without that impatience and bitterneſs, which now boils over in my heart, and would flow to my pen, were I to enter into the particulars of what you write. And, indeed, I am afraid of giving you my advice at all, or of telling you what I ſhould do in your caſe [ſuppoſing you will ſtill refuſe my offer]; finding too, what you have been brought, or rather driven, to, without it; leſt any evil ſhould follow it: In which caſe, I ſhould never forgive myſelf. And this conſideration has added to my difficulties in writing to you, now you are upon ſuch a criſis, and yet refuſe the only method—But I ſaid, I would not for the preſent touch any more that ſtring. Yet, one word more, chide me, if you pleaſe: If any harm betide you, I ſhall for ever blame my mamma—Indeed I ſhall—And perhaps yourſelf, if you do not accept of my offer. 

But one thing, in your preſent ſituation, and proſpects, let me adviſe: It is this, That if youdogo away with Mr. Lovelace, you take the firſt opportunity to permit the ceremony to paſs. Why ſhould younot,when every-body will know bywhoſeaſſiſtance, and inwhoſecompany, you leave your father's houſe, go whitherſoever you will?—You may, indeed, keep him at diſtance, until ſettlements are drawn, and ſuch-like matters are adjuſted to your mind. But even Theſe are matters of leſs conſideration in yourparticular caſe, than they would be in that of moſt others:Becauſe,be his other faults what they will, nobody thinks him an ungenerous man:Becauſethe poſſeſſion of your eſtate muſt be given up to you, as ſoon as your couſin Morden comes; who, as your Truſtee, will ſee it done; and done upon proper terms:Becauſethere is no want of fortune on his ſide:Becauſeall his family value you, and are extremely deſirous that you ſhould be their relation:Becauſehe makes no ſcruple of accepting you without conditions. You ſee how he has always defy'd your relations [I, for my own part, can forgive him for that fault: Nor know I, if it be not a noble one]. And I dare ſay, he had rather call youhis,without a ſhilling, than be under obligation to thoſe whom he has full as little reaſon to love, as they have to love him. You have heard, that his own relations cannot make his proud ſpirit ſubmit to owe any favour to them. 

For all theſe reaſons, I think, you may the leſs ſtand upon previous ſettlements. It is therefore my abſolute opinion, that, if youdogo off with him [And in that caſe you muſt lethimbe judge, when he can leave you with ſafety, you'll obſerve That], you ſhould not poſtpone the ceremony. 

Give this matter your moſt ſerious conſideration. Punctilio is out of doors the moment you are out of your father's houſe. I know how juſtly ſevere you have been upon thoſe inexcuſable creatures, whoſe giddineſs, and even want of decency, have made them, in the ſame hour, as I may ſay, leap from a parent's window to a huſband's bed—But, conſidering Lovelace's character, I repeat my opinion, that your Reputation in the eye of the world requires, that no delay be made in this point, when once you are in his power. 

I need not, I am ſure, make a ſtronger plea toyou. 

You ſay, in excuſe for my mamma (what my ferventlove for my friend very ill brooks), That we ought not to blame any-one for not doing what ſhe has an option to do, or to let alone. This, in caſes of friendſhip, would admit of very ſtrict diſcuſſion. If the thing requeſted be ofgreaterconſequence, or even ofequal,to the perſon ſought to, and it were, as the old phraſe has it,to take a thorn out of one's friend's foot, to put it into our own,ſomething might be ſaid.—Nay, it would be, I will venture to ſay, a ſelfiſh thing, in us to aſk a favour of a friend, which would ſubject That friend to theſameorequalinconvenience, as That from which we wanted to be relieved. The requeſter would, in this caſe, teach his friend, by hisownſelfiſh example, with muchbetterreaſon, to deny him, and deſpiſe a friendſhip ſomerelynominal. But if, by aleſsinconvenience to ourſelves, we could relieve our friend from agreater,the refuſal of ſuch a favour makes the refuſer unworthy of the name of Friend: Nor would I admit ſuch a one, not even into the outermoſt fold of my heart. 

I am well aware, that this is your opinion of friendſhip, as well as mine: For I owe the diſtinction to you, upon a certain occaſion; and it ſaved me from a very great inconvenience, as you muſt needs remember. But you was always for making excuſes forotherpeople, in caſes wherein you would not have allowed of one foryourfelf. 

I muſt own, that were theſe excuſes for a friend's indifference, or denial, made by any-body butyou,in a caſe of ſuchvaſtimportance to herſelf, and of ſo comparative aſmallone to thoſe whoſe protection ſhe would be thought to wiſh for; I, who am for ever, as you have often remarked, endeavouring to trace effects to their cauſes, ſhould be ready to ſuſpect, that there was a latent, un-owned inclination, which balancing, orpreponderatingrather, made the iſſue of the alternative ſhow ever important) ſit more lightly upon the excuſer's mind than ſhe cared to own. 

You will underſtand me, my dear. But if you do not, it may be as well for me; for I am afraid I ſhallhave itfrom you, for but ſtarting ſuch a notion, or giving a hint, which, perhaps, as you did once in another caſe, you will reprimandingly call,'Not being able to forego the oſtentation of ſagacity, tho' at the expence of that tenderneſs which is due to friendſhip and charity.' 

What ſignifies owning a fault, without mending it, you'll ſay?—Very true, my dear. But you know I ever was a ſaucy creature!—Ever ſtood in need of great allowances.—And I know, likewiſe, that I ever had them from my dear Clariſſa Harlowe. Nor do I doubt them now: For you know how much I love you!—If it be poſſible,morethanmyſelfI love you! Believe me, my dear! And, in conſequence of that belief, you will be able to judge, how much I am affected by your preſent diſtreſsful and critical ſituation; which will not ſuffer me to paſs by, without a cenſure, even that philoſophy of temper in your own cauſe, which you have not in another's, and which all that know you, ever admired you for. 

From this critical and diſtreſsful ſituation, it ſhall be my hourly prayers, that you may be delivered without blemiſh to that fair fame, which has hitherto, like your heart, been unſpotted. 

With This prayer, twenty times repeated, concludes 

Your ever-affectionate ANNA HOWE.I hurry'd myſelf in writing This; and I hurry Robin away with it, that in a Situation ſo very critical, you may have all the time poſſible to conſider what I have written, upon two points ſo very important. I will repeat them in a very few words: 

'Whether you chooſe not rather to go off with one ofyour own Sex; with your ANNA HOWE—than with one of theother; with Mr. LOVELACE?' 

And if not, 

'Whether you ſhould not marry him as ſoon as poſſible?' 

LETTER XLI. MiſsCLARISSA HARLOWE,To MiſsHOWE.[The preceding letter not received.]
Saturday Afternoon.ALready have I an ecſtatic anſwer, as I may call it, to my letter. 

'He promiſes compliance in every article with my will: Approves of all I propoſe; particularly of the private lodging: And thinks it a happy expedient to obviate the cenſures of the buſy and the unreflecting: And yet he hopes, that the putting myſelf into the protection of either of his aunts, treated as I am treated, would be far from being looked upon by any, in a diſreputable light. But every thing I injoin, or reſolve upon, muſt, he ſays, be right, not only with reſpect to my preſent, but future, honour; with regard to which, he hopes ſo to behave himſelf, as to beallow'dto be next to myſelf, more ſolicitous than any-body. He will only aſſure me, that his whole family are extremely deſirous to take advantage of the perſecutions I labour under, to make their court, and endear themſelves, to me; by their beſt and moſt chearful ſervices: Happy, if they can, in any meaſure, contribute to my preſent freedom, and future happineſs. 

'He will this afternoon, he ſays, write to his uncle, and to both his aunts, that he is now within view of being the happieſt man in the world, if it be not his own fault; ſince the only woman upon earth that can make him ſo, will be ſoon out of danger of being another man's; and cannot poſſibly preſcribeany terms to him, that he ſhall not think it his duty to comply with. 

'He flatters himſelf now (my laſt letterconfirmingmy reſolution), that he can be in no apprehenſion of my changing my mind, unleſs my friends change their manner of acting by me; which he is too ſure they will not. And now will all his relations, who take ſuch a kind and generous ſhare in his intereſts, glory and pride themſelves in the proſpects he has before him. 

Thus artfully does he hold me to it!— 

'As to fortune, he begs of me not to be ſolicitous on that ſcore: That his own eſtate is ſufficient for us both; not anominal,but areal,two thouſand poundsper annum,equivalent to ſome eſtates reputed a third more: That it never was incumbred: That he is clear of the world, both as to book and bond-debts; thanks, perhaps, to his pride, more than to his virtue. That his uncle moreover reſolves to ſettle upon him a thouſand poundsper annumon his nuptials. And this, (if he writes to his Lordſhip's honour) more from motives ofjuſtice,than from thoſe ofgeneroſity,as he ought to conſider it but as an equivalent for an eſtate which he had got poſſeſſion of, to whichhis[Mr. Lovelace's] mother had better pretenſions. That his Lordſhip alſo propoſed to give him up either his ſeat in Hertfordſhire, or that in Lancaſhire, at his own or at his wife's option, eſpecially if I am the perſon. All which it will be in my power to ſee done, and proper ſettlements drawn,beforeI enter into any farther engagements with him; if Iwillhave it ſo.' 

He ſays,'That I need not be under any ſolicitude as toapparel:Allimmediateoccaſions of That ſort will be moſt chearfully ſupplied by his aunts, or his couſins Montague: As my others ſhall, with the greateſt pride and pleaſure (if I will allow him that honour), by himſelf. 

'That I ſhall govern him as I pleaſe, with regard to any-thing in his power towards effecting a reconciliation with my friends: A point he knows my heart is ſet upon. 

'He is afraid, that the time will hardly allow of his procuring Miſs Charlotte Montague's attendance upon me, at St. Albans, as he had propoſed ſhe ſhould; becauſe, he underſtands, ſhe keeps her chamber, with a violent cold, and ſore throat. But both ſhe and her ſiſter, the firſt moment ſhe is able to go abroad, ſhall viſit me at my private lodgings; and introduce me to their aunts, or their aunts to me, as I ſhall chooſe; and accompany me to town, if I pleaſe; and ſtay as long in it with me, as I ſhall think fit to ſtay there. 

'Lord M. will alſo, at my own time, and in my own manner, that is to ſay, either publicly or privately, make me a viſit. And, for his own part, when he has ſeen me in ſafety, either in their protection, or in the privacy I prefer, he will leave me, and not attempt to viſit me, but by my own permiſſion. 

'He had thoughts once, he ſays, on hearing of his couſin Charlotte's indiſpoſition, to have engaged his couſin Patty's attendance upon me, either at or about the neighbouring village, or at St. Albans: But, he ſays, ſhe is a low-ſpirited, timorous girl, who would but the more perplex us.' 

So, my dear, the enterprize requires courage and high ſpirits, you ſee!—And indeed it does!—What am I about to do!— 

He himſelf, it is plain, thinks it neceſſary, that I ſhould be accompanied with one of my own Sex!—He might, at leaſt, have propoſed the woman of one of the Ladies of his family.—Lord bleſs me!—What am I about to do!— 

AFTER all, far as I have gone, I know not but I may ſtill recede: And if I do, a mortal quarrel, Iſuppoſe, will enſue.—And what if it does?—Could there be any way to eſcape this Solmes, a breach with Lovelace might make way for the Single Life [ſo much, my preferable wiſh!] to take place: And then I would defy the Sex. For I ſee nothing but trouble and vexation that they bring upon ours: And when once enter'd, one is obliged to go on with them, treading, with tender feet, upon thorns, and ſharper thorns, to the end of a painful journey. 

What to do, I know not. The more I think, the more I am embarraſs'd!—And the ſtronger will be my doubts, as the appointed time draws nearer. 

But I will go down, and take a little turn in the garden; and depoſite This, and his letters, all but the two laſt; which I will incloſe in my next, if I have opportunity to write another. 

Mean time, my dear friend—But what can I deſire you to pray for?—Adieu then!—Let me only ſay,—Adieu!— 

LETTER XLII. MiſsCLARISSA HARLOWE,To Miſs HOWE. [In anſwer to LetterXL.]
Sunday Morning, April 9.DO not think, my beloved friend, altho' you have given me, in yours of yeſterday, aſevererinſtance of what, nevertheleſs, I muſt call yourimpartialLove, than ever yet I received from you, that I will be diſpleaſed with you for it. That would be to put myſelf into the inconvenient ſituation of Royalty: That is to ſay, Out of the way of ever being told of my faults; of ever mending them; and In the way of making the ſincereſt and warmeſt friendſhip uſeleſs to me. 

And then how brightly, how nobly, burns this ſacred flame in your boſom! that you are ready toimpute to the unhappy ſufferer aleſs degreeof warmth inher owncauſe, thanyouhave for her, becauſe ſhe endeavours to diveſt herſelf ofSelf,ſo far as to leave others to the option which they have a right to make? Ought I, my dear, to blame, ought I not rather to admire, you for this ardor? 

But, nevertheleſs, leſt you ſhould think, that there is any foundation for a ſurmize, which, altho' it owe its riſe to your friendſhip, would, if therewere,leave me utterly inexcuſable; I muſt, injuſtice to myſelf, declare, That I know not my own heart, if I have any of thatlatentorun-owned inclination,which you would impute toany other but me.Nor does theimportant alternative ſit lightly on my mind.And yet I muſt excuſe your mamma, were it but on this ſingle conſideration, That I could not preſume to reckon uponherfavour, as I could upon herdaughter's, ſo as to make the claim of friendſhip uponher,to whom, as the mother of my deareſt friend, a veneration is owing, which can hardly be compatible with that ſweet familiarity, which is one of the indiſpenſibles of the ſacred tie by which your heart and mine are bound in one. 

What therefore I might expect from myAnna Howe,Iought notfrom hermamma; for would it not be very ſtrange, that a perſon of her experience ſhould be reflected upon, becauſe ſhe gave not up her own judgment, where the conſequence of her doing ſo would be, to embroil herſelf, as ſhe apprehends, with a family ſhe has lived well with, and in behalf of a child againſt her parents?—As ſhe has, moreover, a daughter of her own:—A daughter too, give me leave to ſay, of whoſe vivacity and charming ſpirits ſhe is more apprehenſive than ſhe need to be; becauſe her truly maternal cares make her fear more from heryouth,than ſhe hopes from herprudence; which nevertheleſs ſhe, and all the world, know to bebeyondher years. 

And here let me add, That whatever you maygenerouſly, and as the reſult of an ardent affection for your unhappy friend, urge on this head, in my behalf, or harſhly againſt any one who may refuſe me protection in ſuch extraordinary circumſtances as I find myſelf in; I have ſome pleaſure, in being able to curb undue expectations upon my indulgent friends, whatever were to befal myſelf from thoſe circumſtances; for I ſhould be extremely mortified, were I, by my ſelfiſh forwardneſs, to give occaſion for ſuch a check, as to be told, that I had encouraged an unreaſonable hope; or, according to the phraſe you mention, wiſhed to take aThorn out of my own foot, and to put it into that of my friend.Nor ſhould I be better pleaſed with myſelf, if, having been taught by my good Mrs. Norton, that the beſt of ſchools, isThat of affliction,I ſhould rather learn impatience than the contrary, by the leſſons I am obliged to get by heart in it; and if I ſhould judge of the merits of others, as they werekind to me; and that at the expence of their own convenience or peace of mind. For is not This to ſuppoſe myſelf ever in the right; and all who do not act as I would have them act, perpetually in the wrong? In ſhort, to makemyſake,God's ſake, in the ſenſe of Mr. Solmes's pitiful plea to me. 

How often, my dear, have You and I endeavour'd to detect and cenſure this partial ſpirit in others? 

But I know, you do not always content yourſelf with ſaying what you think mayjuſtlybe ſaid: But, in order to ſhew the extent of a penetration, which can go to the bottom of any ſubject, delight to ſay, or to write, all thatcanbe ſaid, orwritten,or eventhought,on the particular occaſion; and this partly, perhaps, from being deſirous (pardon me, my dear!) to be thought miſtreſs of a ſagacity that is aforehand with events. But who would wiſh to drain off, or dry up, a refreſhing current, becauſe it now and then puts us to ſome little inconvenience by its over-flowings? In other words, who would not allow, for thelivelineſs of a ſpirit, which, for one painful ſenſibility, gives an hundred pleaſurable ones: And theonein conſequence of theother? 

But now I come to the two points in your letter, that moſt ſenſibly concern me: Thus you put them:'Whether I chooſe not rather to go off with one of myown Sex; with my ANNA HOWE—than with one of theother; with Mr. LOVELACE?' 

And ifnot, 

'Whether I ſhould not marry him, as ſoon as poſſible?' 

 

You know, my dear, my reaſons for rejecting your propoſal, and even for being earneſt that you ſhould not beknownto be aſſiſting to me in an enterprize, which a cruel neceſſity inducedmeto think of engaging in; and whichyouhave not the ſame plea for. At this rate,wellmight your mamma be uneaſy at our correſpondence, not knowing to what inconveniencies it might ſubject her and you!—IfIam hardly excuſable to think of flying from myunkindfriends, what couldyouhave to ſay for yourſelf, were you to abandon a mother ſoindulgent?Does ſhe ſuſpect, that your fervent friendſhip may lead you to aſmallindiſcretion? and does this ſuſpicion offend you? And would you, in revenge, ſhew her and the world, that you can voluntarily ruſh into thehigheſt error,that any of our ſex can be guilty of? 

And is it worthy of your generoſity [I aſk you, my dear, is it?] to think of taking ſo undutiful a ſtep, becauſe you believe your mamma would be glad to receive you again? 

I do aſſure you, that were I to take this ſtep myſelf, I would run all riſques rather than you ſhould accompany me in it. Have I, do you think, a deſire todoubleandtreblemy own fault, in the eye of the world? In the eye of that world, which, cruelly as I am uſed (not knowing all), would not acquitme? 

But, my deareſt, kindeſt friend, let me tell you, That we willneitherof us take ſuch a ſtep. The manner of putting your queſtions, abundantly convinces me, that I ought not, inyouropinion, toattemptit. You, no doubt, intend, that I ſhallſotake it; and I thank you for the equally polite and forcible conviction. 

It is ſome ſatisfaction to me, taking the matter in this light, that I had begun to waver before I received your laſt. And now I tell you, that it has abſolutely determin'd menotto go away; at leaſt, not to-morrow. 

IfYou,my dear, think theiſſue of the alternative,to uſe your own words,ſits ſo lightly upon my mind▪in ſhort, that myinclinationisfaulty; theworldwould treat me much leſs ſcrupulouſly. When, therefore, you repreſent,that all punctilio muſt be at an end the moment I am out of my father's houſe; and hint, that I muſt ſubmit it to Lovelace to judgewhenhe can leave me with ſafety; that is to ſay, givehimthe option whether he will leave me, or not; Who can bear theſe reflections, and reſolve to incur theſe inconveniences, that has the queſtion ſtill in her own power to decide upon? 

While I thought only of an eſcape fromThis houſe,as an eſcape from Mr.Solmes; that already my reputation ſuffer'd by my confinement; and that it would be ſtill in my own option, either to marry Mr. Lovelace, or wholly to renounce him; Bold as the ſtep was, I thought, treated as I am treated, ſomething was to be ſaid in excuſe of it—If not to the world, tomyself:And to beſelf-acquitted, is a bleſſing to be preferred to the opinion of all the world. But, after I have cenſured that indiſcreet forwardneſs in ſome, who (flying from their chamber to the altar) have, without theleaſtceremony, ruſh'd upon thegreateſt:After I have ſtipulated with him for time, and for an ultimate option, whether to accept or refuſe him; and for his leaving me, as ſoon as I am in a place of ſafety(which, as you obſerve,hemuſt be the judge of): And after he has comply'd with theſe terms; ſo that I cannot, if Iwould,recall them, and ſuddenly marry;—You ſee, my dear, that I have nothing left me, but to reſolve,notto go away with him. 

But, how, on this revocation, ſhall I be able to pacify him? 

How!—Why aſſert the privilege of my Sex!—Surely, onThisſide of the ſolemnity he has norightto be diſpleaſed. Beſides, did I not reſerve a power of receding, if I ſaw fit? To what purpoſe, as I aſked in the caſe between your mamma and you, has any-body an option, if the making uſe of it, ſhall give the refuſed a right to be diſguſted? 

Far, very far, wouldThoſebe, who, according to the Old Law, have arightofabſolvingorconfirminga child's promiſe, from ratifyingmine,had it been everſo ſolemna oneSeeNumb.xxx. Where it is declared, whoſe vows ſhall be binding, and whoſe not. The vows of a man, or of a widow, are there pronounced to be indiſpenſible; becauſe they are ſole, and ſubject to no other domeſtic authority. But the vows of a ſingle woman, and of a wife, if the father of the one, or the huſband of the other, diſallow of them, as ſoon as they know them, are to be of no force. 

A matter highly neceſſary to be known; by all young ladies, eſpecially, whoſe deſigning addreſſers too often endeavour to engage them by vows; and then plead conſcience and honour to them to hold them down to the performance. 

It cannot be amiſs to recite the very words. 

Ver. 3.If a woman vow a vow unto the Lord, and bind herſelf by a bond, being in her father's houſe in her youth; 

4.And her father hear her vow, and her bond wherewith ſhe hath bound her ſoul, and her father ſhall hold his peace at her; then all her vows ſhall ſtand, and every bond wherewith ſhe hath bound her ſoul ſhall ſtand. 

5.But if her father diſallow her in the day that he heareth; not any if her vows or of her bonds wherewith ſhe hath bound her ſoul ſhall ſtand: And the Lord ſhall forgive her becauſe her father diſallowed her. 

The ſame in the caſe of a wife, as ſaid above. See ver. 6, 7, 8,&c.—And all is thus ſolemnly cloſed. 

Ver. 16.Theſe are the ſtatutes which the Lord commanded Moſes between a man and his wife, between the father and his daughter, being yet in her youth in her father's houſe;. 

. But This was rather anappointmentthan apromiſe:And ſuppoſe it had beenthe latter; and that I hadnotreſerv'd to myſelf a liberty of revoking it, was it to precludebetterormaturerconſideration?—If ſo, how unfit to be given!—How ungenerous to be inſiſted upon!—And how unfitter ſtill, to be kept!—Is there a man living, who ought to be angry, that a woman, whom he hopes one day to call his, ſhall refuſe to keep a raſh promiſe, when, on the matureſt deliberation, ſhe is convinc'd, that itwasa raſh one? 

I reſolve then, upon the whole, to ſtand This one trial of Wedneſday next.—Or, perhaps, I ſhould rather ſay, of Tueſday evening; if my father hold his purpoſe of endeavouring, in perſon, to make meread,orhearread, and thenſign,the ſettlements.—That, thatmuſt be the greateſt trial of all. 

If I am compelled to ſign them over-night!—Then [the Lord bleſs me!] muſt All I dread, follow, as of courſe, on Wedneſday.—If I can prevail upon them, by my prayers—Perhaps, by fits, and delirium, (for the very firſt appearance of my father, after having been ſo long baniſh'd his preſence, will greatly affect me) to lay aſide their views; or to ſuſpend, if but for one week; ifnot,but for two or three days; ſtill Wedneſday will be a lighter day of trial.—They will ſurely give me time toconſider; to argue with myſelf—This will not bepromiſing—As I have made no effort to get away, they have no reaſon to ſuſpect me; ſo I may have an opportunity, in the laſt reſort, to eſcape. Mrs. Norton is to be with me: She, altho' ſhe ſhould be check'd for it, will, in my extremity, plead for me. My aunt Herveymay,on ſuch extremity, join her. Perhaps, my mamma may be brought over. I will kneel to each, one by one, to make a friend. They have been afraid, ſome of them, to ſee me, leſt they ſhould be moved in my favour: Does not This give me a reaſonable hope, that Imaymove them?—My brother's counſel, heretofore given, to turn me out of doors to my evil deſtiny, may againbe repeated, and may prevail:Thenſhall I be in noworſecaſe thannow,as to the diſpleaſure of my friends; and thus farbetter,that it will not be my fault that I leave them, and ſeek another protection: Which eventhen,ought to be my couſin Morden's, rather than Mr. Lovelace's, or any other perſon's. 

My heart, in ſhort, miſgives me leſs, when I reſolveThisway, than when I think of theother:And in ſo ſtrong and involuntary a byaſs, theheartis, as I may ſay,Conſcience.And well cautions the wiſe man:'Let the counſel of thine own heart ſtand; for there is no man more faithful to thee, than It: For a man's mind is ſometimes wont to tell him more than ſeven watchmen, that fit above in a high tower.'Ecclus.xxxvii. 13, 14. 

Forgive theſe indigeſted ſelf-reaſonings. I will cloſe here: And inſtantly ſet about a letter of revocation to Mr. Lovelace; take it as he will. It will only be another trial of temper tohim.Tomeof infinite importance. And has he not promiſed temper and acquieſcence, on the ſuppoſition of a change in my mind? 

CL. HARLOWE.LETTER XLIII. MiſsCLARISSA HARLOWE,To MiſsHOWE.
Sunday Morning, April 9.NOBODY, it ſeems, will go to church this day. No bleſſing to be expected perhaps upon views ſo worldly, and in ſome ſo cruel. 

They have a miſtruſt that I have ſome device in my head. Betty has been looking among my cloaths. I found her, on coming up from depoſiting my letter to Lovelace [for Ihavewritten!] peering among them, the key being in the lock. She colour'd, and wasconfounded to be caught. But I only ſaid, I ſhould be accuſtom'd toanyſort of treatment in time!—If ſhe had her orders—thoſe were enough for her. 

She own'd, in her confuſion, that a motion had been made to abridge me of my airings; and the reportſheſhould make, would be no diſadvantage to me. One of my friends, ſhe told me, urged in my behalf, That there was no need of laying me under greater reſtraint, ſince Mr. Lovelace's threatening toreſcueme by violence, were I to have been carry'd to my uncle's, was a conviction that I had no deſign to go off to him voluntarily; and that if Ihad,I ſhould have made preparations of that kindbefore now; and, moſt probably, been detected in them.—Hence,It was alſo inferr'd, that there was no room to doubt, but I would at laſt comply. And, added the bold creature, if you don't intend to do ſo, Your conduct, Miſs, ſeems ſtrange to me.—Only thus ſhe reconciled it; That I had gone ſo far, I knew not how to come offgenteelly:And ſhe fancy'd I ſhould, infull congregation,on Wedneſday, give Mr. Solmes my hand. And then, ſaid the confident wench, as the learned Dr. Brand took his text laſt Sunday,There will be joy in heaven— 

This is the ſubſtance of my letter to Mr. Lovelace: 

'That I have reaſons, of the greateſt conſequence tomyſelf,and which, when known, muſt ſatisfyhim,to ſuſpend, for the preſent, my intention of leaving my father's houſe: That I have hopes that matters may be brought to an happy concluſion, without taking a ſtep, which nothing but the laſt neceſſity could juſtify: And that he may depend upon my promiſe, that I will die, rather than conſent to marry Mr. Solmes.' 

And ſo, I am preparing myſelf to ſtand the ſhock of his exclamatory reply. But be that what it will, it cannot affect me ſo much, as the apprehenſions of what may happen to me next Tueſday or Wedneſday;for now thoſe apprehenſions engage my whole attention, and make me ſick at the very heart. 

Sunday, Four o'Clock, P. M.MY letter is not yet taken away!—If he ſhould not ſend for it, or take it, and come hither on my not meeting him to-morrow, in doubt of what may have befallen me, what ſhall I do? Why had I any concerns with this Sex!—I, that was ſo happy till I knew This man! 

I din'd in the Ivy ſummer-houſe. It was comply'd with at the firſt word. To ſhew I meant nothing, I went again into the houſe with Betty, as ſoon as I had dined. I thought it was not amiſs to aſk this liberty; the weather ſeeming to be ſet in fine. One does not know what Tueſday or Wedneſday may produce. 

Sunday Evening, Seven o'Clock.THERE remains my letter ſtill!—He is buſied, I ſuppoſe, in his preparations for to-morrow. But then he has ſervants. Does the man think he is ſoſecureof me, that having appointed, he need not give himſelf any further concern about me, till the very moment!—He knows how I am beſet. He knows not what may happen. Imightbe ill, or ſtill more cloſely watched or confined, than before. The correſpondencemightbe diſcovered. Itmightbe neceſſary to vary the ſcheme. Imightbe forced into meaſures, which might intirely fruſtrate my purpoſe. Imighthave new doubts: Imightſuggeſt ſomething more convenient, for any thing he knew. What can the man mean, I wonder!—Yet it ſhall lie; for if he has it any time before the appointed hour, it will ſave me declaring to him perſonally my changed purpoſe, and the trouble of contending with him on that ſcore. If he ſend for it at all, he will ſee by the date, that he might have had it in time; and if he be put to any〈1 page duplicate〉〈1 page duplicate〉inconvenience from ſhortneſs of notice, let him take it for his pains. 

Sunday Night, Nine o'Clock.IT is determined, it ſeems, to ſend to Mrs. Norton, to be here on Tueſday to dinner; and ſhe is to ſtay with me for a whole week. 

So ſhe is firſt to endeavour to perſuade me to comply, and, when the violence is done, ſhe is to comfort me, and try to reconcile me to my fate. They expectfitsandfetches,Betty inſolently tells me, and expoſtulations, and exclamations,without number:But every-body will be prepared for them: And when it's over, it's over; and I ſhall be eaſy and pacified, when I find I cannot help it. 

Mond. Morn. April 10, Seven o'Clock.O MY dear! There yet lies the letter, juſt as I left it! 

Does he think he is ſo ſure of me!—Perhaps he imagines that Idare notalter my purpoſe. I wiſh I had never known him!—I begin now to ſee this raſthneſs in the light every-one elſe would have ſeen it in, had I been guilty of it.—But what can I do, if he come to-day at the appointed time!—If he receive not the letter, I muſt ſee him, or he will think ſomething has befallen me; and certainly will come to the houſe. As certainly he will be inſulted. And what, in that caſe, may be the conſequence!—Then I as good as promiſed, that I would take the firſt opportunity to ſee him, if I changed my mind, and to give him my reaſons for it. I have no doubt but he will be out of humour upon it: But betterhemeet me, and go away diſſatisfied withme,than thatIſhould go away diſſatisfied withmyſelf. 

Yet, ſhort as the time is, he may ſtill perhaps ſend, and get the letter. Something may have happened to prevent him, which, when known, will excuſe him. 

After I have diſappointed him more than once before, on a requeſtedinterviewonly, it is impoſſible he ſhould not havecurioſity,at leaſt, to know if ſomething has not happened; and if my mind hold in this moreimportant caſe.And yet, as I raſhly confirm'd my reſolution by a ſecond letter, I begin now to doubt it. 

Nine o'Clock.MY couſin Dolly Hervey ſlid the incloſed letter into my hand, as I paſſed by her, coming out of the garden. 

Deareſt Madam,I Have got intelligence from one as ſays ſhe knows, that you muſt be married on Wedneſday morning to Mr. Solmes. May-be, howſoever, only to vex me; for it is Betty Barnes: A ſaucy creature, I'm ſure. A licenſe is got, as ſhe ſays: And ſo far ſhe went as to tell me (bidding me ſay nothing; but ſhe knew as that I would) that Mr. Brand the young Oxford Clergyman, and fine ſcholar, is to marry you. For Dr. Lewin, I hear, refuſes, unleſs you conſent; and they have heard that he does not like over-well their proceedings againſt you; and ſays, as that you don't deſerve to be treated ſo cruelly as you are treated. But Mr. Brand, I am told, is to have his fortune made by uncle Harlowe, and among them. 

You will know better than I what to make of all theſe matters; for ſometimes I think Betty tells me things as if I ſhould not tell you, and yet expects as that I will. She, and all the world knows how I love you: And ſo I wouldhavethem. It is an honour to me to love ſuch a dear young Lady, who is an honour to all her family, let them ſay what they will. But there is ſuch whiſpering between this Betty, and Miſs Harlowe, as you can't imagine; and when that is done, Betty comes and tells me ſomething. 

This ſeems to be ſure (and that is why I write: Butpray burn it) you are to be ſearched once more for letters, and for pen and ink; for they know you write. Something they pretend to have betray'd out of one of Mr. Lovelace's ſervants, as they hope to make ſomething of; I know not what. That muſt be a very vilde and wicked man, who would brag of Lady's goodneſs to him, and tell ſecrets. Mr. Lovelace is too much of a gentleman for that, I dare ſay. If not, who can be ſafe of young innocent creatures, ſuch as we be? 

Then they have a notion, from that falſe Betty, I beliefe, as that you intend to take ſomething to make yourſelf ſick, or ſome ſuch thing; and ſo they will ſearch for phials and powders, and ſuch-like. 

Strange ſearching among them! God bleſs us young creatures, when we come among ſuch ſuſpicious relations. But, thank God, my mamma is not ſuch a one, at the preſent. 

If nothing be found, you are to be uſed kindlier for that, by your papa, at the grand judgment, as I may call it. 

Yet, ſick or well, alas, my dear couſin! you muſt be married, belike. So ſays this ſame creature; and I don't doubt it: But your huſband is to go home every night, till you are reconciled to go to him. And ſo illneſs can be no pretence to ſave you. 

They are ſure you will make a good wife, when you be one. So would not I, unleſs I liked my huſband. And Mr. Solmes is always telling them how he will purchaſe your love and all that, by jewels and fine things.—A ſiccofant of a man!—I wiſh he and Betty Barnes were to come together; and he would beat her every-day till ſhe was good.—So, in brief, ſecure every thing you would not have ſeen: And burn This, I beg you. And, pray, deareſt Madam, do not take nothing as may hurt your health: For that will not do. I am, 

Your truly loving Couſin, D. H.When I firſt read my couſin's letter, I was half inclin'd to reſume my former intention; especially as my countermanding letter is not taken away: And as my heart akes at the thoughts of the conflict I muſt expect to have with him on my refuſal. For, ſee him for a few moments I doubt I muſt, leſt he ſhould take ſome raſh reſolutions; eſpecially, as he has reaſon to expect I will. But here your words,That all punctilio is at an end, the moment I am out of my father's houſe,added to the ſtill more cogent conſiderations of Duty and Reputation, determin'd me once more againſt taking the raſh ſtep. And it will be very hard (altho' no ſeaſonable fainting, or wiſh'd-for fit, ſhould ſtand my friend) if I cannot gain one month, or fortnight, or week. And I have ſtill more hopes that I ſhall prevail for ſome delay, from my couſin's intimation, that the good Doctor Lewin refuſes to give his aſſiſtance to their projects, if they have not my conſent, and thinks me cruelly uſed: Since, without taking notice that I am apprized of this, I can plead a ſcruple of conſcience, and inſiſt upon having that worthy Divine's opinion upon it: Which, inforced as I ſhall inforce it, my mamma will ſurely ſecond me in: My aunt Hervey, and my Mrs. Norton, will ſupporther:The ſuſpenſion muſt follow: And I can but get away afterwards. 

But, if theywillcompel me: If theywillgive me no time: If no-bodywillbe moved: If it be reſolved that the ceremony ſhall be read over my conſtrained hand—Why then—Alas! What then!—I can but—But what? O my dear! This Solmes ſhall never have my vows I am reſolved! And I will ſay nothing but No, as long as I ſhall be able to ſpeak. And who will preſume to look upon ſuch an act of violence, as a marriage?—It is impoſſible, ſurely, that a father and mother can ſee ſuch a dreadful compulſion offer'd to their child—But if mine ſhouldwithdraw, and leave the taſk to my brother and ſiſter, they will have no mercy! 

I am griev'd to be driven to have recourſe to the following artifices. 

I have given them a clue, by the feather of a pen ſticking out, where they will find ſuch of my hidden ſtores, as I intend they ſhall find. 

Two or three little eſſays I have left eaſy to be ſeen, of my own writing. 

About a dozen lines alſo of a letter begun to you, in which I expreſs my hopes, (altho' I ſay, that appearances are againſt me) that my friends will relent. They know from your mamma, by my uncle Antony, that, ſome how or other, I now and then get a letter to you. In this piece of a letter, I declare renewedly my firm reſolution to give up the man ſo obnoxious to my family, on their releaſing me from the addreſs of the other. 

Near the eſſays, I have left a copy of my letter to Lady DraytonSee Letterxiii.p.74,of this Vol.; which, affording arguments ſuitable to my caſe, may chance (thus accidentally to be fallen upon) to incline them to favour me. 

I have reſerves of pens and ink you may believe; and one or two in the Ivy ſummer-houſe; with which I ſhall amuſe myſelf in order to lighten, if poſſible, thoſe apprehenſions which more and more affect me as Wedneſday the day of trial approaches. 

CL. HARLOWE.LETTER XLIV. MiſsCLARISSA HARLOWE,To MiſsHOWE.
Ivy ſummer-houſe, Eleven o'Clock.HE has not yet got my letter: And while I was contriving here, how to ſend my officious gaolereſs from me, that I might have time for the intendedinterview, and had hit upon an expedient, which I believe would have done, came my aunt, and furniſh'd me with a much better. She ſaw my little table covered, preparative to my ſolitary dinner; and hoped, ſhe told me, that this would be the laſt day, that my friends would be deprived of my company at table. 

You may believe, my dear, that the thoughts of meeting Mr. Lovelace, the fear of being diſcover'd, together with the contents of my couſin Dolly's letter, gave me great and viſible emotions. She took notice of them:—Why theſe ſighs, why theſe heavings here, ſaid ſhe, patting my neck?—O my dear niece, who would have thought ſo much natural ſweetneſs could be ſo very unperſuadable? 

I could not anſwer her, and ſhe proceeded.—I am come, I doubt, upon a very unwelcome errand. Some things that have been told us yeſterday, which came from the mouth of one of the moſt deſperate and inſolent men in the world, convince your father, and all of us, that you ſtill find means to write out of the houſe. Mr. Lovelace knows every-thing that is done here; and that as ſoon as done; and great miſchief is apprehended from him, which you are as much concerned as any-body, to prevent. Your mamma has alſo ſome apprehenſions concerning yourſelf, which yet ſhe hopes are groundleſs; but, however, cannot be eaſy, nor will be permitted to be eaſy, if ſhe would, unleſs (while you remain here in the garden, or in this ſummer-houſe) you give her the opportunity once more of looking into your cloſet, your cabinet, and drawers. It will be the better taken, if you give me chearfully your keys. I hope, my dear, you won't diſpute it. Your deſire of dining in this place was the more readily comply'd with, for the ſake of ſuch an opportunity. 

I thought myſelf very lucky, to be ſo well prepared, by my couſin Dolly's means, for this ſearch:But yet I artfully made ſome ſcruples, and not a few complaints of this treatment: After which, I not only gave her the keys of all; but even officiouſly empty'd my pockets before her, and invited her to put her fingers in my ſtays, that ſhe might be ſure that I had no papers there. 

This highly obliged her; and ſhe ſaid, She would repreſent my chearful compliance as it deſerved,let my brother and ſiſter ſay what they would.My mamma, in particular, ſhe was ſure, would rejoice at the opportunity given her to obviate, as ſhe doubted not would be the caſe, ſome ſuſpicions that were raiſed againſt me. 

She then hinted, That there were methods taken to come at all Mr. Lovelace's ſecrets, and even, from his careleſs communicativeneſs, at ſome ofmine; it being, ſhe ſaid, his cuſtom, boaſtingly to prate to his very ſervants of his intentions, in particular caſes. She added, that, deep as he was thought to be, my brother was as deep as he; and fairly too hard for him at his own weapons;—as one day it would be found. 

I knew not, I ſaid, the meaning of theſe dark hints. I thought the cunning ſhe hinted at, onbothſides, called rather for contempt than applauſe. I myſelf might have been put upon artifices which my heart diſdained to practiſe, had I given way to the reſentment, which, I was bold to ſay, was much more juſtifiable than the actions that occaſion'd it: That it was evident to me, from what ſhe had ſaid, that their preſent ſuſpicions of me were partly owing to this ſuppoſed ſuperior cunning of my brother; and partly to the conſciouſneſs, that the uſage I met with might naturally produce a reaſon for ſuch ſuſpicions: That it was very unhappy for me, to be made the butt of my brother's wit: That it would have been more to his praiſe, to have aimed at ſhewing a kind heart, than a cunning head: That, nevertheleſs, I wiſhed,he knewhimſelfas well as I imagin'dIknew him; and he would then have leſs conceit of his abilities: Which abilities would, in my opinion, be leſs thought of, if his power to do ill offices were not much greater than them. 

I was vex'd. I could not help making this reflection. The dupe the other, too probably, makes of him, thro' his own ſpy, deſerv'd it. But I ſo little approve of this low art in either, that were I but tolerably uſed, the vileneſs of that man, that Joſeph Leman, ſhould be inquired into. 

She was ſorry, ſhe ſaid, to find, that I thought ſo diſparagingly of my brother. He was a young gentleman both of learning and parts. 

Learning enough, I ſaid, to make him vain of it among us women: But not of parts ſufficient to make his learning valuable either to himſelf, or to any-body elſe.— 

She wiſhed, indeed, that he had more good-nature: But ſhe feared, that I had too great an opinion of ſomebody elſe, to think ſo well of my brother, as a ſiſter ought: Since, between the two, there was a ſort of rivalry as to abilities, that made them hate one another. 

Rivalry,Madam, ſaid I!—If that be the caſe, or whether it be or not, I wiſh they both underſtood better than either of them ſeems to do, what it becomes gentlemen, and men of liberal education, to be, and to do.—Neither of them, then, would glory in what they ought to be aſhamed of. 

But waving this ſubject, it was not impoſſible, I ſaid, that they might find a little of my writing, and a pen or two, and a little ink [Hated art!—or rather, hateful the neceſſity for it!], as I was not permitted to go up to put them out of the way: But, if they did, I muſt be contented. And I aſſured her, that, t•ke what time they pleaſed, I would not go in to diſturb them, but would be either in or near the garden,in this ſummer-houſe, or in the cedar one, about my poultry-yard, or near the great caſcade, till I was order'd to return to my priſon. With like cunning I ſaid, that I ſuppoſed the unkind ſearch would not be made, till the ſervants had dined; becauſe I doubted not, that the pert Betty Barnes, who knew all the corners of my apartment and cloſet, would be imploy'd in it. 

She hoped, ſhe ſaid, that nothing could be found that would give a handle againſt me: For, ſhe would aſſure me, the motives to the ſearch, on my mamma's part eſpecially, were, that ſhe hoped to find reaſon rather to acquit than to blame me; and that my papa might be induced to ſee me to-morrow night, or Wedneſday morning, with temper: Withtenderneſs,I ſhould rather ſay, ſaid ſhe; for he is reſolved ſo to do, if no new offence be given. 

Ah! Madam, ſaid I!— 

Why that Ah, Madam, and ſhaking your head ſo ſignificantly? 

I wiſh, Madam, that I may not have more reaſon to dread my papa's continued diſpleaſure, than to hope for his returning tenderneſs. 

You don'tknow,my dear!—Things may take a turn—Things may not be ſo bad as you fear— 

Deareſt Madam, have you any conſolation to give me?— 

Why, my dear, it is poſſible, thatyoumay be more compliable than you have been. 

Why raiſed you my hopes, Madam!—Don't let me think my dear aunt Hervey cruel to a niece who truly honours her. 

I may tell you more perhaps, ſaid ſhe, (but in confidence, in abſolute confidence) if the inquiry within come out in your favour. Do you know of any-thing above, that can be found to your diſadvantage? 

Some papers they will find, I doubt: But I muſt take conſequences. My brother and ſiſter will be athand with their good-natured conſtructions. I am made deſperate, and care not what is found. 

She hoped, ſheearneſtlyhoped, ſhe ſaid, that nothing could be found, that would impeach my diſcretion; and then—But ſhe might ſay too much— 

And away ſhe went, having added to my perplexity. 

But I now can think of nothing but this man!—This interview!—Would to Heaven it were over!—To meet to quarrel—But I will not ſtay a moment with him, let him take what meaſures he will upon it, if he be not quite calm and reſigned. 

Don't you ſee how crooked ſome of my lines are? Don't you ſee how ſome of the letters ſtagger, more than others!—That is when this interview is more in my head, than my ſubject. 

But, after all, ſhould I,oughtI, to meet him? How I have taken it for granted, that I ſhould!—I wiſh there were time to take your advice. Yet you are ſo loth to ſpeakquiteout!—But that I owe, as you own, to the difficulty of my ſituation. 

I ſhould have mentioned, that in the courſe of this converſation I beſought my aunt to ſtand my friend, and to put in a word for me, on my approaching trial; and to endeavour to procure me time for conſideration, if I could obtain nothing elſe. 

She told me, that, after the ceremony was perform'd [odious confirmation of a hint in my couſin Dolly's letter!] I ſhould have what time I pleaſed to reconcile myſelf to my lot, before cohabitation. 

This put me out of all patience. 

She requeſted of me inherturn, ſhe ſaid, that I would reſolve to meet them all with chearful duty, and with a ſpirit of abſolute acquieſcence. It was in my power to make them all happy. And how affectingly joyful would it be to her, ſhe ſaid, to ſee my father, my mother, my uncles, my brother, my ſiſter, all embracing me with raptures, and folding me by turns to their fond hearts, and congratulating eachother on their reſtored happineſs. Her own joy, ſhe ſaid, would probably make her motionleſs and ſpeechleſs, for a time: And for her Dolly—the poor girl, who had ſuffer'd in the eſteem of ſome, for hergratefulattachment to me, would have every-body love her again. 

Will you doubt, my dear, that my next trial will be the moſt affecting that I have yet had? 

My aunt ſet forth all this in ſo ſtrong a light, and I was ſo particularly touched on my couſin Dolly's account, that, impatient as I was juſt before, I was greatly moved: Yet could only ſhew by my ſighs and my tears, how deſirable ſuch an event would be to me, could it be brought about upon conditions with which it was poſſible for me to comply. 

Here comes Betty Barnes with my dinner— 

The wench is gone. The time of meeting is at hand. O that he may not come!—But ſhould I, or ſhould I not, meet him?—How I queſtion, without poſſibility of a timely anſwer! 

Betty, according to my leading hint to my aunt, boaſted to me, that ſhe was to beimploy'd,as ſhe called it, after ſhe had eat her own dinner. 

She ſhould be ſorry, ſhe told me, to have me found out. Yet 'twould be all for my good: I ſhould have it in my power to be forgiven for all at once, before Wedneſday night. The Confidence then, to ſtifle a laugh, put a corner of her apron in her mouth, and went to the door: And on her return, to take away, as I angrily bid her, ſhe begg'd my excuſe.—But—But—and then the ſaucy creature laugh'd again, ſhe could not help it; to think how I had drawn myſelf in by my ſummer-houſe dinnering; ſince it had given ſo fine an opportunity, by way of ſurprize, to look into all my private hoards. She thought ſomething was in the wind, when my brother came into my dining here ſo readily. Her young maſter was toohard for every-body. 'Squire Lovelace himſelf was nothing at all at a quick thought, to her young maſter. 

My aunt mention'd Mr. Lovelace's boaſting behaviour tohisſervants: Perhaps hemaybe ſo mean. But as to my brother, he always took a pride in making himſelf appear to be a man of parts and learning to our ſervants.PrideandMeanneſs,I have often thought, are as nearly ally'd, and as cloſe borderers upon each other, as the poet tells usWitandMadneſsare. 

But why do I trouble you (and myſelf, at ſuch a criſis) with theſe impertinencies?—Yet I would forget, if I could, the neareſt evil, the interview; becauſe, my apprehenſions increaſing, as the hour is at hand, I ſhould, were my attention to be ingroſſed by them, be unfit to ſee him, if he does come: And then he will have too much advantage over me, as he will have ſeeming reaſon to reproach me with change of reſolution. 

Theupbraider,you know, my dear, is in ſome ſenſe a ſuperior; while theupbraided,if with reaſon upbraided, muſt make a figure as ſpiritleſs as conſcious. 

I know that this wretch will, if hecan,be his own judge, andminetoo. But the latter he ſhallnotbe. 

I dare ſay, we ſhall be all to pieces. But I don't care for that. It would be hard, if I, who have held it out ſo ſturdily to my father and uncles, ſhould not—But he is at the garden-door— 

I was miſtaken!—How may noiſesun-like, be madelikewhat one fears!—Why flutters the fool ſo!— 

I will haſten to depoſite this. Then I will, for the laſt time, go to the uſual place, in hopes to find, that he has got my letter. If hehas,I will not meet him. If he hasnot,I will take it back, and ſhew him whatI have written. That will break the ice, as I may ſay, and ſave me much circumlocution and reaſoning: And a ſtedfaſt adherence to that my written mind is all that will be neceſſary.—The interview muſt be as ſhort as poſſible; for ſhould it be diſcover'd, it would furniſh a new and ſtrong pretence for the intended evil of Wedneſday next. 

Perhaps I ſhall not be able to write again one while. Perhaps not, till I am the miſerable property of that Solmes!—But that ſhall never, never be, while I have my ſenſes. 

If your ſervant find nothing from me by Wedneſday morning, you may conclude, that I can then neither write to you, nor receive your favours.— 

In that caſe, pity and pray for me, my beloved friend, and continue to me that place in your affection, which is the pride of my life, and the only comfort left to 

Your CLARISSA HARLOWE.LETTER XLV. MiſsCLARISSA HARLOWE,To MiſsHOWE.
St. Alban's,Tueſday Morn. paſt One.O my deareſt friend!AFTER what I had reſolved upon, as by my former, what ſhall I write? Whatcan I? With what conſciouſneſs, even byLetter,do I approach you!—You will ſoon hear (if already you have not heard from the mouth of common fame), that your Clariſſa Harlowe is gone off with a man!— 

I am buſying myſelf to give you the particulars at large. The whole twenty-four hours of each day (to begin the moment I can fix) ſhall be imployed in it till it is finiſhed: Every-one of the hours, I mean, that will be ſpared me, by this interrupting man, towhom I have made myſelf ſo fooliſhly accountable for too many of them. Reſt is departed from me. I have no call for That: And That has no balm for the wounds of my mind. So you'll have all thoſe hours, without interruption, till the account is ended. 

But will you receive, ſhall you bepermittedto receive, my letters, after what I have done? 

O, my deareſt friend!—But I muſt make the beſt of it. I hope that will not be very bad! Yet am I convinced, that I did a raſh, an inexcuſable thing, in meeting him; and all his tenderneſs, all his vows, cannot pacify my inward reproaches on that account. 

The bearer comes to you, my dear, for the little parcel of linen, which I ſent you with far better and more agreeeble hopes. 

Send not my letters. Send the linen only: Except you will favour me with one line, to tell me, you will love me ſtill; and that you will ſuſpend your cenſures, till you have the whole before you. I am the readier to ſend thus early, becauſe if you have depoſited any-thing for me, you may cauſe it to be taken back, or withhold any-thing you had but intended to ſend. 

Adieu, my deareſt friend!—I beſeech you to love me ſtill!—But, alas! what will your mamma ſay?—What will mine!—What my other relations?—and what my dear Mrs. Norton? And how will my brother and ſiſter triumph?— 

I cannot at preſent tell you how, or where, you can direct to me. For very early ſhall I leave this place; harraſſed and fatigued to death! But, when I can do nothing elſe, conſtant uſe has made me able to write. Long, very long, has that been all my amuſement and pleaſure: Yet could not that have been ſuch to me, had I not had you, my beſt-beloved friend, to write to. Once more adieu. Pity, and pray for, 

Your CL. HARLOWE.LETTER XLVI. MiſsHOWE,To MiſsCLARISSA HARLOWE.
Tueſday, Nine o' Clock.I Write, becauſe you enjoin me to do ſo.—Love you ſtill!—How can I help it, if I would?—You may believe how I ſtand aghaſt, your letter communicating the firſt news—Good God of heaven and earth!—But what ſhall I ſay?—I ſhall be all impatience for particulars. 

Lord have mercy upon me!—But can it be? 

My mamma will,indeed,be aſtoniſhed!—How can I tell it to her?—It was but laſt night that I aſſured her (upon ſome jealouſies put into her head by your fooliſh uncle), and this upon the ſtrength of your own aſſurances, that neither man nor devil would be able to induce you to take a ſtep, that was in the leaſt derogatory to the moſt punctilious honour. 

But, once more, Can it be? What woman, at this rate!—But, God preſerve you! 

Let nothing eſcape you in your letters. Direct them for me, however, to Mrs. Knollys's, till further notice. 

OBSERVE, my dear, that I don't blameyouby all this—Your relations only are in fault!—Yet how you came to change your mind, is the ſurpriſing thing!— 

How to break it to my mamma, I know not. Yet, if ſhe hear it firſt from any other, and find I knew it before, ſhe will believe it is by my connivance!—Yet, as I hope to live, I know not how to break it to her! 

But this is teazing you!—I am ſure, without intention. 

Let me now repeat my former advice—If you arenotmarried by this time, be ſure delay not the ceremony.—Since things are as they are, I wiſh it were thought, that you were privately married before you went away. If theſe men plead AUTHORITY to our pain, when we aretheirs—why ſhould we not, in ſuch a caſe asthis,make ſome good out of the hated word, for our reputation, when we are induced to violate a more natural one? 

Your brother and ſiſter [that vexes me almoſt as much as any thing!] have now their ends. Now, I ſuppoſe, will go forward alterations of wills, and ſuch-like ſpiteful doings. 

Miſs Lloyd and Miſs Biddulph this moment ſend up their names.—They are out of breath, Kitty ſays, to ſpeak to me.—Eaſy to gueſs their errand!—I muſt ſee my mamma, before I ſee them. I have no way but to ſhew her your letter, to clear myſelf. I ſhall not be able to ſay a word, till ſhe has run herſelf out of her firſt breath.—Forgive me, my dear!—Surprize makes me write thus. If your meſſenger did not wait, and were not thoſe young Ladies below, I would write it over again, for fear of afflicting you. 

I ſend what you write for. If there be any-thing elſe you want, that is in my power, command, without reſerve, 

Your ever-affectionate ANNA HOWE.END ofVol. II.Vol. II.p.166.l.5.from bottom, forſcorpion,r.viper. 

BOOKS printed forJ. OSBORN,inPaternoſter Row;AndJ.andJ. RIVINGTON,inSt. Paul'sChurchyard.
1.PAmela; or,Virtue Rewarded.In a Series of familiar Letters, from a beautiful young Damſel to her Parents. And afterwards, in her Exalted Condition, between Her and Perſons of Figure and Quality. In Four Volumes 8vo. 

Adorned with 29 COPPER-PLATES, deſigned and engraved by Mr.Haymanand Mr.Gravelot.Price bound 1l.4s. 

2.Pamela; or,Virtue Rewarded.In Four Volumes 12mo.Price bound 12s. 

3.Pamela; ou,La Vertu Recompenſée.Traduit de l'Angloiſe. En Deux Tomes. Price 6s. 

4. LETTERS written To and For particular Friends, on the moſt important Occaſions. Directing not only the requiſite Style and Forms to be obſerved in Writing Familiar Letters; but how to think and act juſtly and prudently. Containing One Hundred and Seventy-three Letters. The Third Edition. 

5.AESOP's Fables. With inſtructive Morals and Reflections, abſtracted from Party Conſiderations, adapted to all Capacities; and deſigned to promote Religion, Morality, and univerſal Benevolence. Containing 240 Fables, with a Cut ingraved in Copper to each Fable. And the Life ofAeſopprefixed. Publiſhed in order to cultivate the Principles of Virtue Price 2s.6d.The Second Edition. 

